California Institute of the ArtsElectromagnetic Translucenceartistic approaches to interaction design for installations, interfaces, and mechatronic performancebyNathan Villicaña-ShawA thesis submitted in partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Fine ArtsHerb Alpert School of MusicMusic Technology: Interaction, Intelligence & Design2017
Supervisory CommitteeAjay Kapur, Ph.D.							MentorOwen Vallis, Ph.D.			   			     Committee MemberSpencer Salazar, Ph.D.							Committee Member

AbstractThis thesis presents a variety of approaches for complicating, simplifying or exposing human- circuit interaction within the context of interactive installation art, interface design, and mechatronic performance. After a brief background of related work, this document presents several interactive-installations that each exhibit different approaches to human-circuit interaction. Next, an assortment of electronic-interfaces are discussed in terms of their approach to human-circuit interfacing. An overview of The Pantheon, the authors comprehensive system for creating mechatronic instruments and sound art, along with a sampling of mechatronic performances are discussed in the final section.       The primary goals of this work include (1) presenting a corpus of work that is concerned with human-circuit interaction modalities, (2) exploring the creation and dissolution of abstractions separating humans from circuitry, and (3) to explore the idea of mechatronic/electronic personalities.
AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank my loving and supportive, family that have always believed in my abilities and have given me the freedom to explore what interests me. I want to thank my parents for giving me my tireless worth ethic, sence of moral duty, and love of life.       My mentors, Ajay Kapur and Owen Vallis who have always had my best interest in mind and who have given me the chance to prove myself and my abilities.      I would also like to thank all the professors, instructors, and faculty at CalArts who have guided, inspired, and motivated me throughout the past four years. Tom Jennings for helping me to break free from the technology in my art. Sarah Roberts for helping me to start thinking about space, sound, and interaction in new ways. Spencer Salazar, for his calm wisdom. Clay Chaplin for embracing me as one of his own students.      I would also like to thank all the friends and colleagues that I have studied, collaborated, and learned with throughout the years. Special thanks to Mason for inspiring me to think in larger scale, and for his respectful grace as an artist and human. Peter Blasser, Evelina Dominitch, Dimitry Gelfand, Mike Leize, Shaurja Benaurje.      There are Artists and Scientists who I do not know personally but have been a deep influence in my studies. Leonardo Da Vinci, Nicola Tesla, Elon Musk,       Wolfgang, my dear friend, who is longer with us for his friendship, support, and talks.       Those who I lost contact with but influenced me artistically: John Meagher, Jarred xxx, Pat xxxx, Keith Bishop, Tessa Bishop, xxx, xxx, xxx.
ContentsAbstract	vAcknowledgments	viiContents	ixList of Figures	xvList of Tables	1Chapter 1	Introduction	41.1	Interaction in 21st Century Digital Art	41.2	Interactive Art and Interface Design	51.3	Philosophy for Hardware Development	51.4	Removal from Circuitry	61.5	Thesis Overview & Outline	7Chapter 2	Background	92.1	Electromagnetic Spectrum	92.2	The Artist Scientist	102.3	Circuit Bending & Hardware Hacking	122.3.1	Nicholas Collins – Hardware Hacking	132.3.2	Designing for Hackability	142.4	Tapping into Electromagnetic Systems	152.4.1	Christina Kubisch	152.5	Exposing the Circuitry	172.5.1	Peter Blasser	182.6	Andrew McPherson	192.7	Mechatronic Music	202.7.1	Trimpin	212.7.2	The Logos Foundation and Godfried-Willem Raes	222.7.3	The Machine Orchestra and The Machine Lab	23Chapter 3	Human-Circuit Interaction in the Gallery	253.1	Interaction Rail	273.1.1	Electrical Box – Installation Description	273.2	Approach to Interaction	293.3	Open Interaction	323.3.1	Cathode Ray Tubes - Installation Description	333.3.2	Interaction Design	343.4	Deception	353.4.1	Symbiotic SNES	353.4.2	6 * 9 = 42	363.5	Unwelcoming Spaces	363.5.1	No Humans Allowed: Installation Description	373.5.2	No Humans Allowed – Interaction Design	383.6	Non-Interactive	383.6.1	Digital Rain – Dynamic	383.6.2	Computer Music – Deterministic	403.7	Conclusion	42Chapter 4	Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCI	434.1	Abstractive/Deconstruction	454.1.1	Discovery Synth: Project Overview	454.1.2	Buttons	464.1.3	Sliders	464.2	 Camouflage and Exposure	484.2.1	Retrono – Design Approach	484.3	Re-Appropriation of Conventions	494.3.1	Modular SNES: Project Description	504.4	Deception	504.4.1	Symbiotic SNES: Project Description	514.4.2	Symbiotic SNES - Technical Details	534.4.3	“6 x 9 = 42” and the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot – Interface Description	544.4.4	CTSB – Interaction Design	554.5	Removing Agency	564.5.1	Eavesdropper – Interface Description	574.5.2	Eavesdropper - Interaction Design	574.5.3	EavesDropper – Technical Description	584.6	Orchestrating Circuitry	594.6.1	The Voltage Slammer - Interface Description	604.6.2	The Voltage Slammer – Interaction Design	624.6.3	OneToFour – Interface Description	634.6.4	OneToFour - Interaction Design	644.7	Conclusion	64Chapter 5	Approaches to Human-Robot Performance	665.1	Mechatronic Instruments, Instrumentalists, Personalities, and Digital Co-Composers	675.1.1	Mechatronic Instrument	675.1.2	Mechatronic Instrumentalist	675.1.3	Mechatronic Personality	685.1.4	Digital Co-Composer	685.2	The Pantheon Mechatronic System	685.2.1	Server	705.2.2	Shields	725.3	Mechatronic Instruments played by Humans	765.3.1	Robots Improvisational Jam	765.4	Non-Interactive Performances	775.4.1	Beatles	775.4.2	Hello Humans	785.4.3	Computer Music	785.5	Humans Interacting with Robots in Musical Performances	795.5.1	Robot Whispers - Performance Description	795.6	Mechatronic Personality Social Performances	805.6.1	Mechatronic Personalities	815.6.2	AntiSocial	825.6.3	Hedonism Bot – Performance Description	835.6.4	No Humans Allowed	845.7	Conclusion	85Chapter 6	Conclusion	866.1	Summary	866.2	Primary Contributions	866.3	Final Thoughts	87Bibliography	89
List of FiguresFigure 1: Thesis Outline.	7Figure 2: Leonardo DaVinci – Self-portrait, chalk, 1512 on left:	10Figure 3: Bent Fest 2012	12Figure 4: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.	13Figure 5: Christina Kubisch with one of her listening devices.	15Figure 6: Peter Blasser tuning his rollable synthesizer originally built in 2002.	17Figure 7: Example "Paper Circuit" by Peter Blasser.	18Figure 8: Trimpin with Sheng High in 2006.	21Figure 9: The Man and Machine robot orchestra.	22Figure 10: The Machine Orchestra.	23Figure 11: Required interaction for Electrical Box.	29Figure 12: EB spacial layout.	30Figure 13: One of the listening stations with two EavesDroppers.	31Figure 14: Cathode Ray Tubes - 3 unit version.	33Figure 15: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo.	39Figure 16: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo.	40Figure 17: Discovery Synth	45Figure 18: Second version of the Retrono Synthesizers	48Figure 19: Modular SNES circuit bent video game console.	50Figure 20: Symbiotic SNES installed at the 2016 Bay Area Makers Faire.	51Figure 21: Early version of Symbiotic SNES hardware.	53Figure 22: Chroma Temporal Surveilance Bot interface, final design on right.	55Figure 23: Eavesdropper from outside	57Figure 24: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronics	58Figure 25: First version of The Voltage Slammer Interface shown with the Toys installation at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo.	60Figure 26: The Voltage Slammer, second version.	61Figure 27: OneToFour installed in a private residence in 2016.	64Figure 28: The Pantheon Server initialization routine.	70Figure 29: Brigid Actuator Shield.	72Figure 30: Single Actuator Channel	73Figure 31: Homados Actuator Shield	74Figure 32: Hermes Stepper Driver	75Figure 33: Composition for Robots 2014 final improvisational jam.	76Figure 34: Model A and Model B mechatronic personalities.	81Figure 35: xxxx xxxx feeding the Hedonism Bot during a performance of Hedonism Bot.	83
List of TablesTable 1: Installations and their approach to interaction design covered in this chapter.	26Table 2: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities	44Table 3: Play modes supported by Symbiotic SNES.	52Table 4: Approaches to mechatronic perfromance.	67Table 5: How one bots state change effects the other bots in the installation.	84Chapter 1 Introduction[NV1]I [NV2]am captivated by the power of the electromagnetic spectrum. I am fascinated at the different ways we have developed technology to harness, control, and leverage the awesome power of this spectrum. [TODO add sentence about being fascinated at how we have harnessed magnetism and electricity. Likewise, I love analyzing how we, as human beings, have constructed interfaces to interact with electrical systems. These personal interests are muses for many of the installations, interfaces, and performances presented in this document. Our societal and personal relationships with electricity are complex, strange, dynamic, and a constant source of inspiration in my works.1.1 	Interaction in 21st Century Digital ArtThe Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society, the 1950 cybernetic text written by Norbert Weiner was the first publication which focused research onto human interaction.[1], [2]. [Xxxxx, xxx and xxx, something about cybernetics. TODO][3] [TODO, talk about birth of the field of interaction design.] With the rise of computer technology and the internet, the field of interaction design further developed and flourished. [4] [xxxx something about the rise of digital art and how this thesis presents digital art which is a perfect medium for interactive art. TODO][5] Now, interaction in the gallery is common-place and no-longer in the avant-garde. This thesis hopes to vitalize an interest in exploring different ways to create spaces and objects that facilitate interaction in new, or interesting ways. We are entering into a new epoch where how we interact with technology is changing as many of our devices begin to exhibit traits of intelligence. As our devices begin to be able to answer back, talk to you, hold up its end of a conversation they are no longer simply inanimate tools, but instead take on an extra property. 1.2 Interactive Art and Interface Design       “art becomes interactive when audience participation is an integral part of the artwork. In making interactive art, the artist goes beyond considerations of how the work will look or sound to an observer. The way that it interacts with the audience is also a crucial part of its essence.”       Ernest Edmonds, Professor of Computation and Creative Media at the University of Technology in Sydney      Reference windows and mirrors specifically how they talk about interactive art, or digital art is inherently interface design.[6]      The fields of interactive art and interface design are closely intertwined. 1.3 Philosophy for Hardware DevelopmentThe authors approach for developing the hardware and software used in the installations, interfaces, and performances presented in this document is relatively consistant. The work first begins with a research phase. This is the time where the goal is to learn as much about the low-level technology as possible.  This begins with a few weeks digging deep into the topic both theoretically, by reading about the technology, as well as physically, by building prototypes and conducting experiments. The mechanisms are first approached from the lowest level and then the project works upwards.        For instance, when learning how to design and manufacture printed circuit boards, I spent many months experimenting with etching my own copper clad utilizing various DIY1 and hobbyist approaches before I learned proper circuit design using EAGLE CAD and PCB2 fabrication houses.  When the low level experimental prototypes fail and I understand the reasons why; I take a step back and see if there is anything I can do to simplify my technical approach.  I repeat the process over and over again until I am confident in my chosen approach: completing the research phase. Next I begin the development process.  Incorporating aesthetics, I start developing a production design that both functions as intended and looks good applying everything learned from early models.1.4 Removal from CircuitryIn 2016 we are very removed from electricity and circuitry in its raw form. In our daily lives, we generally press a button or interact with an abstraction that then mechanically operates on the circuitry that is always hidden from view. It is rare that we find ourselves in a situation directly interacting with circuitry. In-fact we are discouraged from attempting to repair our broken electronic devices by stickers, specialty hardware, and stories of electrocution. This has been the case since the introduction of electrical systems and with good reason: electrical energy has the capacity to harm us physically.  Since the War of the Currents starting in the late 1890’s between Tesla and Edison, where public electrocutions of animals and pets were performed in the streets, electricity has been associated with danger and death to a large portion of the population.[7] 	There was once a time when anyone with common since and a little electrical know-how would be able to crack open the case of their miss-behaving electronic device and be able to swifting repair it with a few common components laying around the work bench. In 2017 this is, unfortunately for hackers, tinkers, and circuit benders, no longer the normal scenario. The complexity of our modern gadgets has grown in complexity exceptionally since the mass production of electronic devices.[8] Without special training it would be a fool’s errand to try and fix a modern smart TV or a iPhone. Even less complicated devices such as modern radios implement so much component integration and consolidation everything is packed into highly specialized IC’s and the repair-ability, hack-ability, and tinker-ability is minimal. I do not propose that the loss of the ability for laymen to repair their own gadgets should halt technological progress, the point is to draw attention to the fact that our current technological state is beyond that point.      I believe one of the reasons for our current state can be found in our relationship with electronic devices. In almost all cases, we are concerned with the result of electronic work instead of the electricity itself. For example, the computer I am typing my thesis on right now, which uses electrical energy to conduct its computations, is more useful than the electrical arcs bursting out of a Tesla Coil: even though the Coil consumes orders of magnitude more electricity than my laptop.  To give another example, the lightbulb that is hanging above me right now is functional as a result of the light produced by the electrical work done on the filament: the electricity itself is not directly providing us with light, instead, the light is a byproduct of heat produced by current flowing inside the bulb.       I argue that many of our common assumptions about human-circuit interaction would benefit from questioning, exploration, and discourse. As humans, once we figure out how to do something and it works good enough there can be little immediate incentive to further explore new avenues. Many of the ways that we interact with electronic devices, especially in the art world, is based on old norms of expression and interaction that were established in the 20th century. Just like the QWERTY keyboard layout that is based on the mechanical limitations of typewriters and still persists in much of the English speaking western world, the work in this thesis hopes to provoke dialogue into the status-quo of human-circuit interaction in the gallery art, mechatronic performance, and interface design strata’s.1.5 Thesis Overview & OutlineFigure 1: Thesis Outline.A background chapter which covers artists and movements that have incepted this body of work provides a framework for the rest of the chapters. Next, a variety of installations created by the author that each champion a different approach to user interaction in the gallery are presented in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 presents eight interfaces which approach interaction through different lenses of human-circuit interaction.  Chapter 5 first proposes terminology for discussing mechatronic instruments, then provides an overview of a modular hardware /software system for building mechatronic instruments, sculptures, and installations before outlining seven examples of mechatronic, or human-mechatronic, musical and extra-musical performance that each approach human-mechatronic interaction differently. 
Chapter 2 BackgroundThe installations, performances, and interfaces presented in this thesis are indebted to a variety of contemporary and past artists, movements, and ideas. This chapter presents a selection of the most influential inspirations during the creation of the corpus of work presented in this document. This chapter attempts to contextualize the work presented in the later chapters to help the reader orient themselves into the mindspace of the author.2.1 Electromagnetic SpectrumThe electromagnetic spectrum plays a key role in the work presented in the following chapters. Not only is electronic circuitry inescapabilty tied to the secrets of this broad band of energy, but many of the installations, and interfaces, were directly inspired by some aspect of this force. The electromagnetic spectrum encompasses the radio, microwave, inferred, visible light, ultraviolet, x-ray, gamma ray and cosmic ray wavelengths [TODO make diagram of the spectrum with each installation and how it ties in]. When mankind began to understand and harness the great power of electromagnetic energy our society entered into a new time, a new epoch. No longer were we bound by the limitations of mechanical tools and constructs. We, as a speciies, became liberated by the awesome power of electronic technology. Since xxxx’s xxx of light in the xxxxx we have developed ways to leverage the properties and inherient energy of the entire electromagnetic spectrum. From cameras and camcorders which are able to document and record the reflections of visable light around us to the medical X-Rays that allow doctors to diagnose physical ailments, to the cell-phone towers that transmit xxx waves connecting people from far corners of the globe. The multitude of strategies for leveraging the awesome properties of the EM spectrum and the human inguenity involved with their inceptions into societal knowledge have spawned several of the installations, projectsm, and performances discussed in this document.2.2 The Artist ScientistFigure 2: Leonardo DaVinci – Self-portrait, chalk, 1512 on left:Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci was an Italian painter, inventor, engineer, writer, astronomer, mathematician, sculpture, and overall renaissance badass. Known as the father of paleontology, ichnology, and architecture Leonardo lived from April 15, 1452 to May 2, 1519. Da Vinci epitomized the renaissance humanist artist-scientist through his scientific and artistic pursuits. [9] Leonardo lived a multidiscipline life working in art, medicine, warfair, and science and in his life painted the Moana Lisa and the Last Supper; drew the Vitruvian Man; invented the anemometer, parachute, scuba gear as well as various robotic and mechanic wonders.3 All the while adhering to his principles as a logical being whom listens to the unavoidable wisdom of scientific evidence and method.       My artistic practice dabbles in the fields of electrical engineering, computer science, data science, mechanical engineering, information technology, digital fabrication, design, and physics and I hold the values of Leonardo dear in my approach to art, research, design, and engineering. As we are in a technological renaissance in our epoch, it is apt now, more than ever, to follow Leonardo’s advice and apply saper vedere4 to our practice.[11][NV3]2.3 Circuit Bending & Hardware HackingFigure 3: Bent Fest 2012The circuit bending and hardware hacking communities were my introduction to electronics and interface design. These two groups are of interest to this document due to their approach to interfacing with electronic devices and how their influence has bled into my work. Circuit bending and hardware hacking are both strange, anti-social, punk anarchistic pastimes that invite us to subvert the manufacturers intentions and “Void (OUR) Warranty”.[12, p. -] Often times these hobbies employ a knowledge-on-demand approach to electronics where one learns enough to be safe, have fun, and produce a working end product. The spirit of fun, play, exploration, and practical knowledge that hackers and benders identify are principles that are paramount to my artistic process and the work presented in this document.[13] [14]–[16]2.3.1 Nicholas Collins – Hardware HackingFigure 4: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.Nicolas Collins, born in 1954 in New York City, is a pioneer in the use of microcomputers in live performance who makes extensive use of hacked and repurposed electronic devices as well as custom ‘home made’ circuitry. In 2006 Nicolas published the book Handmade Electronic Music: The Art of Hardware Hacking which has been very influencial in not only my own artistic practice but scores of aspiring hackers, artists, and electricians. Nicolas currently holds the positions of  editor-in-chief for the Leonardo Music Journal and additionally is the chair for the sound department at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.	Handmade Electronic Music5 was the single most influential text in the development of my artistic practice. As circuit bending taught me to be comfortable with exploring electronic circuits and being alright with not fully understanding my actions, the projects in Collins’ book introduced me to creativity and art in electronics.Firmly rooted in the academic world, Nicolas’ book approached electronics differently than Reed Ghazala and the circuit benders6. Projects such as xx and xxx in Handmade Electronic Music not only xx but xxxx. [TODO, how is did he approach different? Why does it matter?]2.3.2 Opportunistic Design and Exploratory DevelopmentOpportunistic design is a set of design and development practices which is common throughout varied fields as web programming, hardware hacking, industrial design, and art. [TODO, more about opportunistic design and exploratory development].2.3.3 Designing for HackabilityHardware hacking and circuit bending both usually rely on the repurposing or reuse of preexisting electronic devices and/or components. While a few of the interfaces presented in this document are modified preexisting electrical systems following the hardware hacking approach, the majority of the interfaces have been designed and built from the ground up. Among the approaches used when designing and building the interfaces discussed in this document is “Designing for Hackability” as proposed in the 2004 international conferences Designing Interactive Systems (DIS) by Anne Galloway, Jonah Brucker-Cohen, Lalya Gaye, Elizabeth Goodman, and Dan Hill in the paper with the same name.      Interfaces that are designed with Hackability as a tenant are customizable allowing the user to turn them into the device they want them to be. Hackable interfaces cultivate reciprocity between the designers, users, and the devise itself. They embrace unanticipated uses and are designed to be both transparent and robust.[18] Applying these principles to interface design is not new and many examples of interfaces with hackability can be seen from modular synthesizers to laptops. However in the current age of hyper-normalization and increased technological literacy, there is a revitalized consumer desire for individuality and personalization. Hackability is one approach to fulfilling those desires and is important to investigate. [19]2.4 Tapping into Electromagnetic SystemsHardware Hacking and Circuit Bending are both inherently violent activities that tend to mutilate the original device: altering its capabilities, interactions, and even purpose. While that method is exemplified in several works presented in this document, and is a valid approach, another source of inspiration is Christina Kubisch’s installation art. Christiana’s installations empower visitors to listen to electronic circuitry with her custom magnetic flux sonification headphones: without any violence, obtrusiveness, or even physical contact. Her interactions are introverted yet exploratory, covert and empowering.2.4.1 Christina KubischFigure 5: Christina Kubisch with one of her listening devices.A truly multidiscipline artist, Christina Kubisch (b 1948) studied electronic music at the Milan Conservatory of Music. She quickly became unsatisfied with the conventionality of the conservatories offered topics of study and she decided to enroll in the Technical University in Milan to take classes in electronics. In her own process of opportunistic design, as described in an interview for cabinet magazine, Christina stumbled upon what has become known as the Electrical Walks:“One day I bought a telephone amplifier, a little cube that you could put next to your telephone so that you could hear it without having the receiver in your hand. The cube was switched on, and when I came into the laboratory, it started to make really strange sounds in my handbag. I took it out and asked my professor what was going on. He explained to me that there were coils in this little cube, and that they picked up some of the machines in the room. It was like a flash in my mind. It was exactly at the time when I wanted to get away from performance and start producing installations.”      She goes on to explain how her excitement over the technology commanded her installation configurations.“In my early installations, there were people wandering around with these little cubes in their hands, walking along thick electrical cables that had sounds running through them. I didn’t think about using the sounds of the outside world. I had no idea about electricity in general or that it could make interesting sounds. I just used the system of electromagnetic induction as a way of amplifying musical sounds.”      After five years she started working with an Italian headphone manufacturing company and commissioned 20 custom headphones with her electromagnetic snooping technology installed inside of large soviet headphones. She made several installations showcasing the custom headphones but eventually the set deteriorated and the project was put on hold. Almost a decade later, she found a sponsor which helped develop the technology to create an improved system. In 1999, at the Potsdamer Platz in Berlin, the new system was used for the first time in the installation Forty Pillars and One Room located in a large parking garage. She wrapped lengths of cables covered in green phosphorescent paint around forty of the free standing pillars in the parking garage creating the trunks of trees as seen from underground. Each of the pillars emitted a different sequence of tones: with all of them sharing the common theme of water. The participants particular sonic experience is dependent on their position within the space and the specific time of day [20]. Forty Pillars and One Room interestingly uses electricity and concrete to create a world of implied nature. The sounds Christina curated created a sonic landscape in direct juxtaposition to the electrical and industrial materials she used for construction.      In 2004, Kubisch officially began exhibiting works which used the EM listening devices in public locations under the umbrella name of Electrical Walks7. The Electrical Walks, although closely related to her previous work with the listening devices, feature different source material and interactions than seen in her past work. Instead of planting composed electromagnetic signals in wiring that people listen to with her devices, Electrical Walks delegates the creation of sonic content to the environment. When researching a new walk, Kubisch embarks into an (usually) urban center with an EM listening device. She walks around the city and maps the magnetic activity. She uses the master map to create tours showing areas of sonic interest with routes that tour the cities magnetic features. The public receives copies of the routes along with her custom magnetic field listeners and are sent off to explore the environment at their own pace. Her work creates an intimate experience that can be shared by many people at the same time. Technology is at the installations core, but is not shoved in your face. Instead, the installation abstains form telling the participant too much about the wonders at hand. At the same time, the technology is necessary to tell the narrative and impart the experience it is attempting to enforce. 2.5 Exposing the CircuitryFigure 6: Peter Blasser tuning his rollable synthesizer - originally built in 2002.Several of the interfaces discussed in this thesis seek to expose electrical systems both physically and functionally8. Designing electrical systems which interface directly with our bodies electrical properties have been around for quite a while. [TODO cite the Theremin] From the early circuit bending technique of “Laying Hands”[21], where the bender licks his fingers and touches random parts of an exposed running circuit board to quickly determine active areas of the board, utilizing our bodies electrical properties to influence an electrical system has been in the repitour of the resourceful tinker for decades. 2.5.1 Peter BlasserFigure 7: Example "Paper Circuit" by Peter Blasser.Peter Blasser, a graduate from the Oberlin College and Conservatory as well as one of Don Buchla’s apprentices, is an instrument builder, performer, and teacher. He develops instruments under the notion of “inner surface” in electronic sound production. These instruments involve unprotected circuits where performers are able to touch the circuitry directly. Blasser's idea of the “inner surface” was proved deeply influential in my approach to interface design and electronics holistically.[22]        In a world dominated by rigid rules and equations, it is refreshing to enter into Blasser’s unique approach to circuit design. His paper circuits, point to point soldering, and capacitive interfaces are stunningly creative, unique, and functional. Personality dominates his creations and he is always creating new, fun ways to help us to build a relationship with the electronics we build. For example, approximately one third of the component values in his schematics are left to the discretion of the builder providing a range of values that could be used instead of a singular value. Blasser does this so each instrument is unique and that the creator of the instrument has a stronger personal bond to the instrument. The closer you look at a Blasser schematic the more you notice Peters quirky terminology: such as harry caps and X resistors. His circuits are intentionally unstable, unpredictable, while being both reactive and generative. His electronic diagrams are hand drawn, often using his own symbols in place of industry conventions, according to the electronic effect the component might have on the sonic output of the device. This makes it easier for one to transverse the functionality of his circuitry, while imbuing a since of wonder and exploration when building one of his designs.      I had the pleasure of meeting Peter Blasser at a workshop at CalArts in 2015. Talking to Blasser about his approach to circuit design while building one of his Old Mr. Grassi synthesizers was very influential in the development of my views on human-circuit interaction. The development of several of the projects presented in this document especially in terms of circuit design, user interaction, and relationship building. The experience helped me figure out ways to apply circuit bending techniques and approaches (which rely on a starting object to modify) to the design of new interfaces which are not built from the dissection, augmentation, or modification of a preexisting electrical system. 2.6 Andrew McPhersonI feel like he might have to get a section?      While augmented instrument builders such as Andrew McPherson with the xxxxxx are explored designing devices with the intention of unpredictability, exploration, and hackability from the onset, McPherson, and others, designs tend to obscure the underlying circuitry and still require the user to use sensing technol.[23]Also what about the touchkeys? 2.7 Mechatronic Music[NV4]I compose for human-mechatronic performance ensembles as well as design and build my own mechatronic instruments and mechatronic personalities. [TODO, add section about what mechatronics is and what mechatronic music is…][TODO sentence about advantages of musical robots in the loudspeaker world].[24][TODO, sentence about rise of Arduino and how this has helped immensely with creation of musical robots].[25][TODO, sentence about digital fabrication also helping with mechatronic instrument creation].[26], [27][]. The work of Trimpin, Godfreid Raes, and the Machine Orchestra have been the most influential forces in mechatronic art that the work presented in this document is indebted to.2.7.1 TrimpinFigure 8: Trimpin with Sheng High in 2006.Trimpin is a kinesthetic sculpture, mechatronic inventor, and installation artist based out of Seattle, Washington. Throughout his inspirational career, he has maintained his personality, ethics, morals, and artistic integrity through in his work and actions. He is humble and always willing to teach the wonders of mechanical art to anyone with an open soul. [NV5]Trimpin has guided my work building the mechatronic personalities introduced in Chapter 3 and has been a deeply valued mentor throughout my tenure at CalArts.2.7.2 The Logos Foundation and Godfried-Willem Raes Figure 9: Godfied-Willem Raes with some of his robotic instruments.Godfried-Willem Raes is the mastermind behind the Man and Machine robot orchestra at the Logos Foundation in Ghent, Belgium.[28] His extensive orchestra of over 45 organ-inspired wind instruments, string instruments, percussion instruments, and noise generators are imbues with extensive character and care.  With the founding of the Logos Foundation in 1968 and their commitment to mechatronic instrument creation and composition in 1990 the Man and Machine orchestra is one of the oldest robotic orchestras in the world.       With the Logos Foundation being foremost a collective of experimental composers and musicians Raes work is centered around writing music specifically to take advantage of the unique capabilities of their unique instruments. Being a concerned as much with the musical output of the machines as their aesthetic or technical qualities Raes is vitally important to my own work composing music for mechatronic ensembles in his adoption of experimental theatrical aspects to some of his performances.  Raes performs as a solo act, with the Logos duo9, the Logos ensemble10, and the Logos Robot Orchestra. [TODO, find performance of him naked with the bots].[NV6]       Raes, his students, and collaborators do a thorough job documenting the process of design and construction of many of the instruments that make up the Man and Machine Robot Orchestra. Raes takes notes of what is accomplished for the project on each day it is worked on and freely publishes the information along with pictures on the logos foundation website. These valuable notes even contain information about what books and/or websites were used to research various bits of information such as saxophone fingering diagrams. The work of the Logos Foundation2.7.3 The Machine Orchestra and The Machine Lab[NV7]Figure 10: The Machine Orchestra.The California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) Machine Lab is the hub of the Music Technology department as well as the Digital Arts Minor. Besides being the technological hub for the institute, the Machine lab is home to the Machine Orchestra and the nine mechatronic instruments the Orchestra consists of.[29]–[31]   The Machine  Orchestra is a mixed ensemble of  human and robotic performers that  combines the musical elements of a laptop ensemble with  the acoustic affordances of robotic instruments.  Over the past xx years the students and instructors at CalArts have been designing and building new instruments for the Orchestra as well as repairing and improving old instruments.  Over the past four years I have gotten to know the different instruments in the Machine Lab, I have repaired, maintained, upgraded, and written music for all of the robots residing in the Machine Lab. The Machine Orchestra was my introduction into Mechatronics and robotic instrument performance.      There are nine mechatronic musical instruments inhabiting the Machine Lab at CalArts. BreakBot is a hanging percussion instrument that features a kick drum, a crash cymbal, and a snare11  [32]. Spread throughout the entire room, hidden in the ceiling grid, are twenty Clappers: each consisting of a single solenoid, with a blue LED inside of a ping-pong ball. MalletOTon is a mechatronic marimba that features 48 rotary solenoid actuated rubber headed mallets striking its keys  [30]. StringThing is made up of three steel strings picked by DC motors with plectrum mechanisms as well as steel post dampener mechanisms activated by solenoids. RattleTron is a percussion instrument that includes an assortment of hand percussion instruments along with three pipes struck with solenoids. MahaDeviBot is an Indian percussion robot that consists of a total of twelve solenoid actuators that strike frame drums, gongs, bells, wood blocks, and finger cymbals. GanaPatiBot is a percussion robot that features five plastic drums of various sizes each with multiple solenoid powered beaters. Lydia is a standup piano with twenty solenoids that strike the strings percussively, sixteen DC motors which ring the strings via custom rubber strikers, and a hacksaw which is sawing through a large steel bolt at the base of the instrument.  JackBox is both a percussion and string instrument which features twelve guitar and bass strings, three cymbals, eleven German beer glasses, an eight key xylophone, and three plastic drums which are all activated using dozens of solenoids12. Tammy consists of six brass bells struck with steel posts and six custom cut wooden keys directly actuated by solenoid plungers  [32]. 
Chapter 3 Human-Circuit Interaction in the GalleryIn this chapter, several of the authors installations are presented in terms of their approach to human-circuit interaction in the gallery.  The first section, Interaction Rails, presents Electrical Box as an installation that guides participants through a series of sequential interactions. Next, Open Interaction presents Cathode Ray Tubes as an installation that creates an interaction structure that is simple, open, flexible, and branching. The Deception section discusses Symbiotic SNES as a project that revisions familiar interfaces and games through the manipulation of control messages: creating new experiences with old hardware. Next, No Humans Allowed is presented as an example of a hostile environment that discourages interaction with the installation in the Unwelcoming Spaces section. The chapter concludes with the Non-Interactive Art section where Computer Music and Digital Rain are presented as two different approaches to non-interactivity in the gallery.InstallationStanceInteraction Approach to CircuitryElectrical BoxNeutralPassiveObservationalCathode Ray TubesHuman-CentricSubversive AugmentationSimplification, Semi-exposureNo Humans AllowedCircuit-CentricAggressive, HostileSemi-exposure with Observation from AfarComputer MusicNeutral (with human-centric and circuit-centric components)NoneTotal ExposureChroma Temporal Surveillance BotJudgmentalSymbiotic SNESDigital RainNeutralNone      Dynamic/Reactive to outside dataTable 1: Installations and their approach to interaction design covered in this chapter.[NV8]3.1 Interaction RailThe terminology “Interaction Rail”13 was invented by the author to describe installations where participants have multiple interactions with the space which must occur in a specific order. An example of an interaction rail outside the context of gallery art would be the credit card chip card readers. In order to pay for your goods, you must complete the interaction rail.1. Insert card into chip reader.2. Confirm that the amount is ok.3. Sign for the Purchase4. Remove the card from the chip-reader.If you were to skip one of these steps, or attempt to do any one of the steps out of order the purchase will not be completed. Unsurprisingly, these configurations can be risky for installation art. If a visitor skips one of the steps in the rail, they are unable to continue and will not experience the installation as intended. Installations that require sequential interaction thus need to guide the participant along the rail: either with explicate written, or symbolic, instructions or through other subtler means. The installation Electrical Box is discussed as an example of one way an installation can attempt to guide a participant through an interaction rail, without the use of explicate directions. 3.1.1 Electrical Box – Installation DescriptionFigure: Electrical Box - WaveCave Gallery September 9th-19th 2016.Electrical Box presents a silent room ordained with over 1000’ of instrument cables hanging from the rigging grid. Small, Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) flicker at the ends of the cables suspended in air. Several pairs of headphones hang on the walls in the far corners of the gallery. Viewers are expected to walk to the end of the room and put on the headphones along with the attached metal tins. At first, participants only hear faint static but after walking along the hanging cables, radio broadcasts can be heard emanating from the cables. The tins are able to listen to the sampling of radio stations and radio-static being projected through the gallery. The visitor is able to explore the electromagnetic energy which was silent when entering the gallery that is now permeating the space. 3.2 Approach to InteractionFigure 11: Required interaction for Electrical Box.Electrical Box attempts to guide visitors through a singular interaction rail14. In an attempt to avoid presenting explicate written or symbolic instructions for how to interact with the installation, several subtler methods were used to encourage gallery viewers to stay on track. This included minimal signage, the strategic placement of open space, lighting, installation hardware, and strategic interface design.      The signage for Electrical Box is designed to function as clues for visitor to discern portions of the interaction rail. The simple sign outside of the gallery only discloses the name of the installation and that the installation is ‘electro-magnetic’ and ‘interactive’. Each portion of information disclosed in the sign was essential for helping a visitor to decouple to interaction. Electromagnetism informs visitors to the underling physics behind the installation while also promoting an aura of danger and scientific adventure. The ‘interactive’ portion of the sign informs the visitor of the participatory nature of the installation15. Knowing that the installation is interactive puts visitors more into the mindset of participants and builds up an expectation for an interactive element16. As the headphones are attached to the eavesdroppers and no audio is generally head when they are donned, the knowledge that the space is interactive helps the participant to use the eavesdroppers on the cables hanging in the space.Figure 12: EB spacial layout.            Although the installation utilizes over 1000’ feet of cable, 35% of the gallery is designated as free space. EB’s empty space functions in two ways: by creating a boarder and by creating viewing posts. The entire outside rows and columns of the grid (the frame) is left void of cables. The frame encourages viewers to enter into the space, approach the headphones, and to explore the room17.  The frame functions as a walkway around the installation; helping guide viewers though the interaction rail while softening the transition into the gallery by allowing intermediate commitment to the space.  In addition to frame, EB also features a total of nine listening ports which each allow gallery viewers to stand, un-harassed by hanging cables, amidst the installation.18 These prime locations made it easier to listen to a variety of signals simply by spinning in a circle.  The listening posts gave people a place to go once they have discovered the listening devices providing destinations within the gallery: creating increasingly engaging experience.Figure 13: One of the listening stations with two EavesDroppers.3.2.1.1 Lighting"A painter should begin every canvas with a wash of black, because all things in nature are dark except where exposed by the light."  -- Leonardo da Vinci“I will love the light for it shows me the way, yet I will endure the darkness for it shows me the stars.” -- Og MandinoThe approach to lighting in EB is as Mandino foreshadows, a tool to show people the way, to guide viewers along the rail. EB has three sources of light that participants are exposed to once they enter into the space: the cable LED’s, the door light, and the flood-lights. This sections discusses how each of these luminance sources were leveraged to guide the viewer to the interaction rail.      At the terminus of each of the cables are white LED’s that mirror the audio signal being transmitted through the cables. These LED’s are the primary visual draw to most visitors due to their flickering and relative brightness in the dim room. As indicated in figure 12, seven LEDs are concentrated in the rear of the installation. The remaining nine LED’s are distributed through the rest of the space, leaving a single row buffer between the formation in the rear and the foreground. The formation of LEDs in the rear created a visual focal point which encouraged folks to enter the space and walk to the rear of the room19.       I decided to add ‘peep’ holes on the doors. The second source of door light was far more impactful to the user experience. When the doors are opened the gallery is flooded with outside luminescence. The large glass doors took upwards to 8 seconds to close. All of this was very beneficial to the individual that enters into the gallery space but ended up being quite disruptive to gallery viewers already interacting with the space. Dim spot lights are directed to the corners where the headphones and eavesdroppers were resting on glass corner shelves. The spot lights are not so bright as to drastically change the overall ambient lighting levels in the space, but did provide just enough illumination to draw attention to the headphones and to make them more inviting to interact with.203.3 Open InteractionThis approach to interaction design provides multiple ways to effect the installation while refraining from establishing a hierarchy of value over the varied interaction options. This approach seeks to create a rewarding experience for both participants that are willing to spend the time to fully explore the capabilities of the space as well as the wallflower that is uncomfortable touching things in front of strangers. Cathode Ray Tubes is presented as an installation that follows this approach and is designed to create a hyper-reactive environment which facilitates a multitude of possible interactions.3.3.1 Cathode Ray Tubes - Installation DescriptionFigure 14: Cathode Ray Tubes - 3 unit version.Cathode Ray Tubes21 creates a video feedback loop out of four cathode ray tube (CRT) televisions (TVs) and four modern knock-offs of the Nintendo Entertainment System video game consoles which have been slightly modified (Retrono). The Retrono interfaces are very sensitive to both changes in the electromagnetic field that surrounds them making them vulnerable to our bodies electrical properties. The Retronos, with no game cartridge inserted, produce the varied and evolving visuals seen in figure 14. The CRT TVs that each unit is placed in front of creates a strong electro-magnetic field which functions as an input stimulus to keep the Retronos in a state of flux. Changes in the visual output of the TVs result in corresponding changes in the EM field surrounding the Retrono units creating a feedback loop between each of the Retronos and its TV.       The installation presents a broad electrical system with many different optional interaction modalities.  As an Open Interaction installation, Cathode Ray Tubes does not favor one specific interaction with its technology but instead passively encourages folks to participate.  [NV9]3.3.2 Interaction DesignThe video and audio synthesized by the Retrono devices can be affected by gallery goers in many different ways:• By standing within 3 feet of any of the interfaces the gallery viewers own electromagnetic field effects the output of the synths.• By waving a hand over the device, this effects are more profound.• By touching the devices users have more agency over the resulting synthesis• By moving a box, repositioning it in relation to its TV will change the result.• By touching multiple boxes at one time the results change. • People touching people touching boxes will result in different effects.There is nothing in the gallery that values one form of interaction over another and the experience of interaction is designed to be one of discovery. The desired interaction is both none and all of the bullet points presented above. It is most important that the viewer discovers their own unique relationship with the space and the artifacts and is able to forge their own backstory and explanation of the space. InteractionCommitmentEffect SeverityExample ResultNoneNoneMild      Screens will slowly oscillate as the feedback look is only source of input.Stand within 3’ of unitMildMild-Medium      The unit will visually react to your presence.Table 4: Possible interactions with the installation.3.4 DeceptionThis section examines two installations that each attempt to deceive its participants in a different way. Symbiotic SNES presents a familiar interface that behaves in unexpected ways while 6 * 9 = 42 hides its true motives from the participant. Deceptive interaction is not common in the gallery and was an interesting avenue for exploration.3.4.1 Symbiotic SNESFigure 15: Symbiotic SNES control flow.Symbiotic SNES (SSNES) is an interactive installation that consists of a CRT TV set up with an unmodified Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES), and two unmodified SNES controllers which are plugged into a SSNES device which is in turn plugged into the SNES console. The SNES console is loaded with an unmodified copy of Super Mario Brothers and visitors are invited to grab a partner and try their luck playing the game. Although everything appears as it should, when participants start to play the familiar video game the subversive nature of the SSNES hardware reveals itself.      The device intercepts controller messages from the two players and performs a bitwise && operation on the binary controller data before sending the resulting controller message to the console. The result is a truly co-operative gaming experience as both of the players have to work together to control Mario, the in game character, on his adventures. The in game avatar is unable to move around the digital world unless the two players coordinate their button presses as the bitwise operation will only let button presses that are occurring on both controllers to be passed to the console.       The SNES console was the most popular video game console of the 16-bit era, despite its late-coming into the game, and is well known as both a device and interface.[33] SSNES presents a video game console and accompanying video game that is nostalgic and vary familiar to a large portion of the population that grew up in my generation.[34] Many, many people have played the Super Mario Brothers game and think they know how the controllers will behave. This installation seeks to disrupt these familiar interactions with the intention of creating a new way to interact with the game.3.4.2 6 * 9 = 42According to The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy, 42 is the answer to life, the universe, everything, while 6 * 9 is the question.[35] 6 * 9 = 42 seeks to bring the deceptive nature of data into the light. The seemingly xxx installations presents an iMac computer, with no keyboard or mouse, but instead a custom built interface that looks like a guitar pedal with one button and a single knob. As a gallery viewer approaches they are able to see a temporally distorted video feed of their actions. By pressing the button and turning the knob they can modify the underlying slit-scan algorithm. After they are satisfied with the experience they leave to go on with the day. Unknown to the participant the underlying algorithm: the Chroma Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) has a more sinister agenda. 10% of the button is presses will cause the program to perform a “random profiling”. The program will save the currently displayed frame, perform a Chroma analysis22 and based on the results assign a political orientation to the interactee. The program then proceeds to tweet the image along with a proclamation of political orientation. 	None of this activity is explicitly told to the user, who only experiences a temporally dropped framerate. In fact, the user will have to use their computer or smart device to go to https://www.twitter.com/CTSB3 to get any idea of the agenda of the program. 3.5 Unwelcoming SpacesIf the definition of an interactive installation is only realizable with the agency of a visitor: I propose that an anti-interactive installation is an installation that when observed by a visitor loses its facilities and ceases to function. NHA’s mechatronic personalities do everything in their power to get people to leave and attempt to create an uncomfortable, unnerving hostile environment. No Humans Allowed (NHA) is an example of a circuit-centric interaction architecture. NHA’s mechatronic personalities react with aggression or silence with the presence of a human. In the since that the installation is in its most active state when no-one is present to observe the system I am presenting NHA as an anti-interactive installation.3.5.1 No Humans Allowed: Installation DescriptionNHA creates a community of mechatronic personalities that reside in the “gated” WaveCave community. The personalities are xenophobic: reacting to outsiders via paralysis or violence. When the presence of a human is detected, the community breaks down and no longer functions harmoniously. The result is a hostile space that outsiders are not able to enter without being either attacked or shunned by the society residing within. Each of the six mechatronic sound sculptures (personalities) are constructed from extruded aluminum, acrylic, ultrasonic rangefinders, solenoids, DC motors and LED’s. The personalities are either hanging from the grid or resting on the floor depending on their size and construction. The ultrasonic rangefinders allow each personality to detect the presence of gallery viewers who will affect their behavior. When no outside presence is detected, all members of the community are alive, active, and productive. The presence of a human or ‘other’ disrupts the community. If the outsider gets too close to any specific sculpture, the personality will either become paralyzed by hate and fear (turn off) or will attempt to “violently” deter the intruder (loud, abrupt, a-rhythmic noises). Either way, the personality will be so preoccupied by the presence of the ‘other’ it will no longer contribute to the community as a whole, disrupting the harmony of society. No Humans Allowed hopes to shine light on the danger of xenophobic ‘other’ thinking that is becoming more and more common in the UK with Brexit and the United States with the election of Trump. With the rise of mechatronics, robots, AI the question of AI morality is becoming a topic of discussion in more and more circles. Do we want our robotic children to exhibit violent, isolationist, bigoted tendencies or do we want them to be accepting, loving and caring to all other forms of live and intelligence?      Three of the robotic personalities are standing sculpture constructed out of 80/20 extruded aluminum beams, three different banks of 6 solenoids and four stepper motors. The other three personalities are motor mobiles: the top is two pieces of clear acrylic cut in a circle., there is an Arduino onboard that controls 6 5V 3200rpm DC motors that each have a white LED soldered between its two leads. The gallery consists of three pair of personalities with each pair containing one mobile and one standing sculpture. When no ‘other’ is detected in the proximity of the sculptures the standing and hanging personalities chirp in unison, each solenoid triggering is mirrored by a motor twitching in the hanging personality.  However, as soon as someone is detected the link between the two is broken as the more aggressive standing sculpture attempts to deter the invader while the hanging personality Is too paralyzed by fear and hatred to do anything.3.5.2 No Humans Allowed – Interaction DesignNHA discourages interaction with the robots. Ultrasonic rangefinders are used to determine the presence of outsiders and if someone is present in the room the personalities will start to shut down, no longer performing for the gallery goer. If someone ventures too close to one of the personalities, they become aggressive and do anything in their power to scare the viewer away. This is the opposite of the other installations which invite interaction and encourage people to interact with the environment to forge a relationship with the space.3.6 Non-InteractiveThis section looks at two different approaches to creating installation art that is non-interactive. Digital Rain is a dynamic installation whose activity is determined by the current weather patterns from across the United States of America. The second example, Computer Music, is a static installation where an ensemble of mechatronic instruments perform a composition for eight-hours throughout the day. 3.6.1 Digital Rain – Dynamic      In the 21st century, it is nearly impossible to avoid digital technology in the day-to-day grind. The work discussed in this thesis seeks to re-open the discussion of how we interact with electrical systems on the most fundamental way. It hopes to invite participants to ask how their bodies electrical properties coexist and affect the electromagnetic devices that are so vital to modern life. The goal of the art presented in this thesis is to invite us to question how we interact not only with electrical systems and digital devices, but with everyone and everything in the world around us. I hope to present these interactive scenarios in a manner where people are empowered to discover the experience themselves and to look for new ways to interact with the world around them in a broad sense.Figure 16: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo.Digital Rain is a data driven art installation, examining the crossroads of algorithmic and generative music, emergence patterns, data sonification, and technology driven systems of expression. 192 electromagnetic relay switches are arranged in a grid and mounted onto a wall. The relays are orchestrated by 6 Arduino Mega’s which are networked together and controlled by a hidden host computer. Weather conditions from a randomly selected meteorological station on the globe is collected by a Python script. A text-to-speech program announces the location and selected aspects of the weather report through a speaker that sits in front of the installation. Meta conditions (sunny, rain, etc.) select the base composition algorithm while the performance specifics are a factor of the forecasts wind speed, humidity, temperature and pressure. Digital Rain utilizes the mechanical ticking of the relays switching as the sonic source material for the piece. The relays, because of their precision and speed, are able to actuate fast enough to produce sustained pitch. This in addition to their idiosyncratic rhythmic snaps allows for us to create a wide variety of soundscapes. When the generative composition comes to a close, the system resets and a new station is polled.3.6.1.1 Approach to ActuationThis installation attempted to directly sonify weather conditions through the use of electromagnetic relay switches. The playback speed of the sonification was mapped to the temperature of the current station: with a slower playback when the weather is cooler. The humidity dictated the density of notes, with a higher humidity resulting in more per minute. The installation cycles through stations at a steady pace, only lingering on a single station for more than a minute if networking errors occur. This is to bring to light the dynamic, reactive nature of the installation. Additionally, with the text-to-speech announcing the weather conditions when a new station is selected the installation does a good job of explaining itself.[NV10]3.6.2 Computer Music – DeterministicFigure 17: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo.Computer Music is an installation that is not affected by any outside influence. The mechatronic ensemble of floppy disk drives(FDD), hard disk drives (HDD), stepper motors, and CD-ROM drives are controlled by four Arduino microcontrollers. A Python script runs on a MacBook Pro which listens to MIDI traveling through an internal IAC bus. For Computer Music, the composition was written in Ableton Live but the configuration allows any program or programming language capable of outputting MIDI messages to control the mechatronic ensemble. The FDD’s and CDROMs were pitched and able to be addressed with corresponding MIDI note numbers. The HDD spindles were continuously spinning throughout the composition while the stepper motors raised and lowered their top case both visually exposing the spinning disk below and sonically providing a filtered white noise. Lastly, the treys of the CD-ROMs were able to be opened both for their theatrical effect and awkward sound.       One thing that sets Computer Music apart from other approaches to mechatronic instruments is the fact that the original housings for the motors are maintained. Additionally, usually with mechatronic instruments the motors and actuators are used to trigger some sort of musical instrument be it a membrane or a string. Computer music literally amplifies the sounds of the motors themselves as the primary sonic material instead of the physical work done by the motor. Luckily for me, there has been extensive work done in the field of making music from Floppies, HDD’s and CD-ROM drives and I really just had to find the information and implement it. The excellent Arduino library Moppy, written and developed by the programmer SammyIAm, provides an easy to use interface for playing MIDI notes on floppy drives.[36] I was able to create a new internal MIDI bus on my Mac and pipe MIDI messages from Ableton Live to Moppy which in turn controlled the Floppy Drives.      Floppy drives take a four pin power connector that consists of one 12V, one 5V and two GND wires. This is the same pin configuration that is used by the old-school Molex connectors that all HDD’s and CD-ROM drives utilized in the early 2000’s.[37] I grabbed an old computer power supply I had lying about and a perfboard and created three long rails for my two power connections and my ground to which I connected six floppy drives. I built custom connectors and jumpers to fool the floppies into thinking they are connected to a computer and the fun began. 3.6.2.1 Approach to Non-InteractionWithout an interactive element or any indeterminacy due to external factors this approach gives absolute control over the outcome of the installation. As the piece involved the playback of a composition that was written especially for the mechatronics and, as with most classical music, there is no room for interpretation. The only variance in what someone experiences is dependent on the time in which they come to visit the installation. This installation takes a deterministic approach to non-interactive installation art in the same way that a looping video projected on a wall does. The video remains static, its contents do not change and if someone stays in the gallery long enough they will see the entire thing. In the same manner the composition Computer Music does not change and the mechatronic performance of that composition does not change from one instance to another: if someone stays in the gallery for long enough they will hear the entire piece.3.7 ConclusionThis chapter presented five different approaches to interactivity, with example installations, for gallery installation art. Electrical Box in the Interaction Rails section created a complex set of interactions that must be executed sequentially. Open Interaction showed Cathode Ray Tubes as an installation that presented a highly reactive system that could be interfaced with in a variety of ways: all with equal validity. Deception talked about installations that attempted to deceive users by either re-appropriating familiar interfaces, Symbiotic SNES, or by disguising their true intentions, 6 * 9 = 42. Unwelcoming Spaces looked at No Humans Allowed as an installation that creates an aware space which is hostile to gallery viewers and discourage interaction. Non-Interactive looked at using both deterministic and dynamic approach’s to creating interesting non-interactive mechatronic installations with Computer Music and Digital Rain respectively.  Collectively these installations are the authors attempt to question how we interact with electronic devices in the art gallery and explore possible interaction frameworks for creating new interactive art.Chapter 4 Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCIIt is important for designers and builders of computer applications to understand the history of transparency so that they can understand that they have a choice.[6, p. 31]Electricity, in its raw form, is of little use: the power of electronics comes from the design and construction of many different types of electronic components that are combined in specific ways to accomplish tasks. As a result, we usually interact with electricity via a physical abstraction. For instance, when you press buttons on your microwave to make popcorn, you press a button that bridges two points in a circuit creating a connection between two parts of the circuit that did not exist before. This causes electrons to flow. You operate through the button which then operates on the circuit, changes the circuits state and electrical work is done.       This chapter discusses different approaches for creating interfaces that challenge interaction conventions between humans and electronic systems. Some of the approaches discussed, such as the Discovery Synth, by removing any abstractions for us to operate on require that the interactee becomes part of the circuitry. Approaches that bypass the interfaces of preexisting electrical systems and insert a puppeteer that controls multiple ‘puppet’ devices are presented with the Voltage Slammer and Toys projects. Techniques that involves the interception and manipulation of control data is discussed with the Synergetic SNES and 4-to-1 projects. The Retrono interfaces are discussed as examples utilizing subtractive manipulation techniques to expose systems to the direct interactions seen with the Discovery Synth project.       This chapter outlines a variety of design processes to facilitate the creation of novel interfaces for interacting with the electromagnetic spectrum.Project NameType of ProjectConvention AddressedApproach To Interface DesignHCIMHCIM NatureDiscovery SynthSynthesizer/InstallationButton/Pot AbstractionsSimplificationDirectInjectiveVoltage SlammerSequencer/Installation/Circuit Bending ToolObject interactionAbstractionAbstractedInjectiveModular SNESCircuit Bent Video Game Console / InstallationExpectationsSubversive Injection and redirectionAbstractedSubversive and InjectiveSynergetic SNESInstallationCo-operative gamingComplicationInterjectedSubversiveRetronoVideo Synthesizer/InstallationObject interactionBypassing interface, simplificationDirectInjectiveEavesdropperSuper-Human Powers/InstallationAgency SimplificationDirectInvestigoryTable 2: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities4.1 Abstractive/DeconstructionFigure 18: Discovery SynthThis section introduces the Discovery Synth (DS) as an example of applying techniques of deconstructivist and abstraction to interface design. This project takes the abstraction of a button and potentiometer and realizes them in a way that integrates the human body as the mechanical portion of the device. 4.1.1 Discovery Synth: Project OverviewThe DS is a Raspberry Pi powered interface that has been used for both installations and experimental music performance. It features sixteen voltage dividers, eight of which are standard variety potiometers while the other eight were custom for the DS. Additionally, there are eight buttons which were also designed custom for the DS. The instrument was crafted from reclaimed materials: the buttons and pots were housed in an old lamp casing, the main body was crafted out of wood found on the side of the road, and the ‘tuning’ pegs were salvaged from an old guitar. Inside of the wooden housing there is a Raspberry Pi with a custom deigned cape that allowed the device to read its 24 sliders, pots, and buttons. 	The Raspberry Pi 2 features 26 General Purpose In/Out (GPIO) pins that can be used as either inputs or outputs at a logic level of 3.3V.[38] While these GPIO pins are very useful for many cicuits, they are somewhat limited by the fact that they are only digital pins with each individual pin only being designed to source minimal current. The Discovery Synth Cape23 gives the Raspberry Pi IO capabilities that reflect those of an Arduino or similar microcontrolle: giving the Pi the ability to read analog values from sensors. This is done with two MCP3008 8-channel 10-bit A/D converters which are used to read the sixteen voltage dividers found on the interface. Circuitry for 12 buttons, two LEDs, and a LCD monitor is provided by the cape in addition to the A/D converters. 	For the software, ensemble performers use Pure Data[39] as the audio/video synthesis engine and to read values from the buttons, pots, and sliders. Each of the memers of the ensemble built their own personal version of the Discovery Synth free to choose whatever specific components, enclosures, and configurations they preferred. As long as the final instrument contained 16 voltage dividers and 8 buttons, students were free to customize their interface as desired. I used conventional potentiometers for 8 of my voltage dividers but decided to construct the other 8 voltage dividers and 8 buttons from raw materials.4.1.2  ButtonsThe buttons constructed for the DS are designed without any physical mechanism  that might separate the action of pressing from the flow of electricity. They have no casing, or housing and there is no part of the design that is not functional and vitally important to working properly. The design process involved distilling how Normally Open (NO) electro-mechanical push buttons function: they consist of two conductive paths that are electronically separated from each other in their resting state. When a specific event occurs24 in some way the paths are joined temporarily allowing a current to flow from one path to another.       The interface presents two conductive bolts spaced a few millimeters apart: one end is connected to the power rail while the other end is being monitored by the Raspberry Pi.  By pressing on the two bolts with a finger an interactee is able to create an electrical connection through their skin and the moisture on their body to complete the circuit. Skin is one of the most resistive types of tissue in the human body with resistance of over 100,000 ohms in some cases, as oppose to our internal body resistance averaging around 300 ohms. As result, the DS’s button circuitry utilized 10Mohm resistors for pull downs to account for the overall circuit resistance. 4.1.3 SlidersThe goal for the construction of the ‘sliders’ was to remove the physical abstraction that rests between the human and the circuitry and to create a more direct interaction. The design removed the wiper from the potentiometer design and instead relied on the user physically connecting the leads to a resistive strip. It used 32 gauge Kanthal25 wire. As I wanted to use a material that was as resistive as possible I chose to use the smallest gague before running the risk of injuring the user. The 32 AWG gauge wire that was used measured in as a mere 8 thousandths of an inch thick and worked well for the device. The wire is strung across two bridges that position the wire about a half an inch above a strip of copper tape. The tape has an extremely low resistance, less than 1 Ohm a foot, and functioned as a trace or wire. One end of the Kanthal wire is attached to system ground while the other end is connected to the power rail on the Raspberry Pi. The copper tape is hooked up to a xxxx multiplexer aft When the tungsten wire is pressed against the copper tape a voltage divider is created.       Unfortunately, as the wires have such low resistance, the voltage dividers draw a fairly large amount of current; 110mA each. Unlike a Microcontroller such as the Arduino, the Raspberry Pi 2 has very low maximum output current ratings on its GPIO pins. The Pi 2 was designed with the spec of 3mA current draw from each of the pins, with a maximum draw of 16mA from a single pin; or 51mA from the entire device.[38] The combined current draw of all eight of my deconstructed sliders was more than the Pi could handle at 880mA. The solution was to add a resistor in series with the tungsten wire with a value of 1k. Unfortunately, this greatly reduced the fidelity of the signal received from the sensor, but with some software smoothing it was usable given the fact that the controller also included eight vanilla pots that could be mapped to anything requiring more precision.	One disadvantage of this design is the fact that when the sliders are not being pressed with a finger the Kental wire will move back up to its resting position breaking the circuit.  In this way, the sliders act as Normally Open Potiometers NOP’s. This quirk ended up being desirable under some circumstances: working well for controlling some effects, filters, or sample playback speeds. In compositions that demanded the ability to hold and maintain an intermittent value those controls were either mapped to the standard potiometers, of which eight were provided by the DS, or copper pipe segments were used to hold a value, freeing up the fingers for other tasks.      This circuitry allowed for the performer to directly complete the circuitry for the voltage divider without acting through a physical abstraction. There is no barrier between the human finger and the electrons flowing through the synthesizer. This gives this instrument a quality that is somewhat unique within the domain of computer interfaces; it will electronically react differently to the person depending on their unique electrical properties at the time.4.2 [NV11] Camouflage and ExposureFigure 19: Second version of the Retrono SynthesizersThis section looks at the Retrono interface, used in the Cathode Ray Tubes installation, as a case study in applying techniques of camouflage and exposure to interface design. The Retrono interface is simple a repackaged video game console that is presented in a way that violates the original devices circuitry. The interface exposes, highlights, and reveals all of the internal circuitry of the original device, ironically disguising it from recognition.4.2.1 Retrono – Design ApproachDesigning the Retrono was an act of removal and replacement. After completely removing the original plastic cases, the controller ports were de-soldered and the red power LED’s were replaced with white ones. Retrons are literally turned inside out26 and repackaged in custom enclosures. With their circuitry unveiled, and with no software to guide their computational logic, the Retrons becomes very susceptible to electro-magnetic interference. The Retrons are effectively transformed into 8-bit a/v synthesizers that generate their output based on the electrical noise present in the circuit. Cathode Ray Tubes eliminates all sensors, buttons, knobs and all “middle-men” between the circuit and the user and is directly controlled by the electrical properties of the user’s body. The Retronos are designed to make the human body an effective controller: due to its inherent electrical properties. Acts such as waving a hand in front of a TV or Retron, touching a TV or a Retron, moving a Retron’s angle or distance from a TV and combinations of the above (touching a Retron and placing your hand a few inches away from a TV) will produce different effects that resonate throughout the feedback loop. If multiple people are in the gallery space, the installation scales nicely as the number and complexity of the effects produce even more drastic results in the Retron feedback loop.4.3 Re-Appropriation of ConventionsThe Modular SNES is introduced in this section as an example of an interface that challenges interaction through the re-appropriation of established interaction conventions. This project takes a patchbay interface, similar to a modular synthesizer, and overlays that onto of a SNES video game console to control a variety of different glitches and circuit bends. 4.3.1 Modular SNES: Project DescriptionFigure 20: Modular SNES circuit bent video game console.The Modular SNES is a Super Nintendo Entertainment System that has been hacked and circuit bent using an Arduino Microcontroller. As the internal logic levels of the SNES if 5V  4.4 DeceptionThis section presents the Symbiotic SNES (SSNES) as well as the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) as examples of deceptive HCIM.  First the SSNES’s project is discussed and its method of presenting familiar situations and breaking your expectations. Next the “6 x 9 = 42” installation and the CTSB are presented as a more sinister example where the system makes grand claims on the viewer’s political orientation and publically slanders them for their perceived views.4.4.1 Symbiotic SNES: Project DescriptionFigure 21: Symbiotic SNES installed at the 2016 Bay Area Makers Faire.The SSNES intercepts controller messages from two seemingly unaffected controllers and alters the data before sending it to the unaware SNES console. What makes this interface deceptive is the fact that there is no indication to either the SNES or the Player that an agent is acting on the data. The SSNES acts a saboteur or psi-operative, coloring the data into misinformation. The SSNES system is an attempt to create new experiences from familiar technology. Two SNES controllers are attached to an Arduino Mega that mimics a SNES console and decodes the controller information, such as button presses, performs computation on the data, and sends the data in a modified state to an actual SNES. What the system does depends on the current operating mode. NameOperationResultUltimate Co-OpBitwise ANDOnly buttons pressed by both players are passed to the console.Bitwise XOROnly buttons pressed by one player will get passed to the console. (multiplayer mode)Alternating-PressesButton PressesAlternating-TimeTurn LengthsPlayers alternate total control over the character over a set period of time.Two FaceController SplitPlayers alternate control over different parts of the controller. Table 3: Play modes supported by Symbiotic SNES.      There have been over a dozen modes created to this date spread between two main types: single player and multiplayer modes. The single player modes are all different ways that two participants are able to play a single player game together assisted the SSNES. For example, the “Agree” mode only sends messages (button presses) to the SNES if both of the input controllers are pressing the same button at the same time.  The “Both Control” mode grants both input controller’s full agency over the SNES by summing the input from the two controllers into one stream of information sent to the SNES. “Teamwork” functions by only accepting one button press from each player at a time: if you want to run and jump one input controller must be pressing the run button while the other must press the jump button. There are also a few alternating modes that only give one player control at a time, but shifts the control back and forth between the two input controller according to the number of buttons pressed or a time period.4.4.2 Symbiotic SNES - Technical DetailsFigure 22: Early version of Symbiotic SNES hardware.Two SNES knock off controllers have their plugs cut off and wires stripped. The SNES controller uses five wires to communicate with the SNES console. The SNES powers the circuitry on the controller with the first two wires which are 5V and GND. The other three pins are for communication: clock, latch, and data. Thanks to the XXXXX Arduino library it is just a simple matter of (INSERT CODE) to read in incoming controller data. Once the Arduino knows which buttons are being pressed on the two input controllers it performs its logic before flipping digital pins that are connected to pads with wires soldered into them whose other ends are soldered to each of the button pads of a SNES controller. When the sensing side of the button pad reads 5v it sends an ‘ON’ messages to the SNES, instead of the controller receiving this voltage via the bridging of the two sides of the button, the Arduino mimics this be sending its own voltage to the pad.       As oppose to my other work with SNES consoles, this project is completely portable. The Symbiotic SNES system will work on any production SNES ever made and is not tied to any hardware modifications to the console itself. As the SNES’s internal voltage level is most always 5v, the console lends itself nicely to interfacing with Arduino microcontrollers, in this project the Arduino is directly powered through its output connections to the SNES console.        The SNES controller’s buttons are purely binary, meaning they are either on or off with no alternative: this lends itself nicely to bitwise logic operations. In fact, that is how all of the first mods started out.  If the controller inputs from the two controllers have a bitwise AND performed on them the resulting interaction will be that no messages get sent through unless both controllers are pressing the same button at the same time: which is the “Agree” mode. Likewise, if a XOR is performed on the incoming controller data only buttons that are pressed on a single controller are sent through, but if both controller press the button they cancel each other out and no message is sent to the host.      The second category of modes are the multiplayer modes which were designed to be used when playing a multiplayer competitive game. 4.4.3 “6 x 9 = 42” and the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot – Interface DescriptionThe Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) is a simple interface that only consists of a single button and a 12 position rotary switch. The two components are housed in a xxx metal box, typically used for guitar effects pedals. The box is connected to an iMac which runs a Processing program. The program performs various types of slit-scan inspired video effects processing on the frames picked up from the computers webcam. The rotary switch changes the type of processing that is being performed. Examples include color-separated Perlin noise masks, xxxx, xxx, and xxx. When the button is pressed the program will reconstruct the mask, resulting in a variation of the type of processing being performed. 4.4.4 CTSB – Interaction DesignFigure 23: Chroma Temporal Surveillance Bot interface, final design on right.CTSB was designed with the principles of creating a friendly, easy to use device that appears like it is doing one thing while in reality its real agenda is hidden. While the interface is straightforward and designed to be simple to understand and operate, the software serves a more sinister purpose. 	The CTSB has gone through two revisions. The first version of the interface consisted of six buttons on the top of a BB aluminum project enclosure box. The buttons were broken out into two rows of three buttons. All of the buttons were xxxmm Normally Open pushbuttons. The top right button was red while all of the other buttons were black. Inside of the enclosure an Arduino Nano reads the button presses and reported the result to a Processing sketch that handled both communication with the microcontroller and the video processing effects. Each of the buttons on the controller game the user an axis of control over the video processing. This included: changing the buffer length, reconstructing a mask, cycling through the mask types, toggling between separating the Red, Green, and Blue color channels, inverting the color processing, tweeting a photo, and cycling through different frame rates. All of these degrees of control, resulted in millions of different program states that could be achieved. After some testing it became apparent that something simpler that facilitated a more curated set of possible states was required. 	The second version of the interface contained only a single button that both redraws the masks under the current program rules, and a 12 position continuous rotary switch which allowed the user to choose between 12 different program states. This simplified design allowed for gallery viewers to more consistently experience a program state that is ‘interesting’, get less confused by what each button actually did, while still inviting exploration, and allowing for millions of possibilities. Another benefit with this configuration is how it obscures the act of tweeting from the user. By simple tweeting the photo 10% of the time whenever the button is pressed no explanation needs to be given. [NV12][TODO: also add picture of an example output from the interface.4.5 Removing AgencyThis section presents the EavesDropper as an example of an interface designed to remove the users agency over the device. The goal of the EavesDropper was to impart a superhuman ability, the ability to listen to magnetic flux, on users of the device. As the device was not intended to be used as an interface, or a technological tool, I did not want to give users the impression that they were in control of the device, or even fully understand it. The Marvel superhero Cyclops, is an apt analogy. His destructive laser vision is always on as long as his eyes are open. It is always blazing away at 100%, there is no option for calibrating the destructive power of his vision without the use of technology. Likewise, I wanted peoples sense of magnetic eavesdropping to be something that they either have, in fully power, or do not have.4.5.1 Eavesdropper – Interface DescriptionFigure 24: Eavesdropper from outside4.5.2 Eavesdropper - Interaction DesignThe Eavesdropper were designed to be magical black boxes27: artifacts that obscured  its internal workings and logic from the participant. In addition to avoiding the possibility that a gallery viewer would misread the interaction element of the installation as the fiddling with dials and knobs on the EavesDroppers the absence of any user control removes any calibration process, operational learning curve, or control mishaps that might occur. (TODO: figure out something to cite about not giving too much control to people to in the gallery).      The absence of user control over the EavesDroppers also helps guide participants to pick up the devices and walk around the gallery (step five in the rail). The lack of an interface had the added benefit of removing any frustration related to learning/adjusting a set of parameters, while also greatly reducing the number of things that can be broken or damaged. Ideally, the EavesDropper functions as an extension of the body; a task easier to achieve with a simple, intuitive interface.      As soon as someone is given a degree of control over an object, a relational shift occurs. Once the person is granted agency over the object, a dominant relationship emerges. The object become subservient to the user: the object is controlled by its user. This destroys the sensation of wonder; we now control the device, have power over it and it is no longer as magical, operating beyond our control and understanding. To avoid giving the interactee any mechanism for controlling the EavesDropper circuitry, the devices have a fixed.4.5.3 EavesDropper – Technical DescriptionFigure 25: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronicsThe EavesDropper system is the technological heart of EB. The devices leverage the properties of EM inductance to sense changes in a magnetic field that the device emits. Changes in its own field resulting from external sources creates a voltage difference in the device causing a small current to flow. This signal is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones where it is transduced into acoustic energy in the form of sound. The EavesDropper design priorities were cost effectiveness, simplicity, and reliability. Each system consists of a small metal tin with a pair of Telex headphones plugged into the side. Inside each of the tins, there is a single-coil guitar pickup, a stereo amplifier, a ¼” headphone jack, and a lithium ion battery. The amplifiers are small 1.85 x 2.11 cm breakout boards that house PAM8403 ICs that provide the required signal gain28. The PAM8403’s filter-less architecture allows it to drive a speaker load directly; without the need of any additional gain stages, filtering, or components. They are relatively efficient Class-D amplifiers that consume less power than comparable Class AB or Class A amplifiers. They operate off of a supply voltage between 2.5 and 5.5 volts, allowing them to be powered directly with a Lithium-ion battery.[40] The batteries are rechargeable 3.7V 4000mAh lithium ion batteries. To save space and money, I abstained from the use of battery cases in favor of soldering male JST29 RC battery plugs directly to the terminals of the batteries30. I wrapped the batteries and cables in electrical tape and coated the ends with liquid electrical tape. This insulated the batteries from the metallic case, saved space while providing an interface for hot-swapping the batteries. 4.6 Orchestrating CircuitryThis approach to interface design seeks to create a singular interface that can control several different electrical systems that would otherwise have to be controlled separately. The Voltage Slammer is used as a case study of how this approach can be applied while creating an interface for controlling circuit bent children’s toys. 4.6.1 The Voltage Slammer - Interface DescriptionFigure 26: First version of The Voltage Slammer Interface shown with the Toys installation at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo.The Voltage Slammer interface is designed to control a variety of circuit bent battery powered toys with a central interface. The interface has gone through several different designs, the first version of the interface was made of wood, included less channels of control than the most recent design and did not include nearly as much visual feedback as the current design. The current iteration of the Voltage Slammer features sixteen rotary encoders with built in push buttons and RGB31 LEDs. I replaced the SPST32 toggle switches with large sleeker metal pushbuttons, also with LED’s inside. The current interface is powered by an Arduino Mega and can be either batter powered or powered via USB. It functions both as a controller for specially hacked toys or electronic devices or as a useful tool for hardware hacking and circuit probing/bending. It is designed specifically for working with low voltage DC circuits and can’t handle anything high voltage or high current. Its first eight output channels are PWM33 waves each with a pot controlling intensity (PW) and a switch to cut off the current flow entirely. The first eight outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation.Figure 27: The Voltage Slammer, second version.      The next five outputs are very similar to the first eight with the noticeable exception that they have no feedback LEDs, no on/off switches and are arranged on the interface in a separate group. They are intended to be used to control motors in bent devices, or any other bend in which you desire a constant current and don’t want the output to be effected by the master delay pot. When Toys was presented at the Digital Arts Expo these outputs controlled the talking robotic bear. In the rear of the device all 13 outputs are accessible via RCA connectors, with the ring connected to a common ground and the internal pin the hot signal. In addition, there is one additional RCA connection in which both the ring and pin are connected to ground, to allow for easier probing and bending.      The Voltage Slammer is not only a mechanism for controlling circuit bent electronics but it also a platform for assisting in the act of circuit bending itself. The Voltage Slammer is part of an ongoing exploration in controlling circuit bent toys and instruments with Arduino powered interfaces.  It allows for simultaneous control over up to sixteen circuit bent devices.  The interface has a RGB-pushbutton-rotary encoder for each of its sixteen channels of control with an additional eight buttons, also each with their own RGB led. The interface has a RGB led for status and debugging. Lastly, so it had options for its interactivity it also featured two ultrasonic rangefinders: one facing upwards and the other facing forward.      All of the devices were bent using the interface. The interface utilized RCA connectors between the circuit bent devices and the interface. This was because of the inexpensive nature of these connectors and the fact that they had two points of connection, as oppose to say, a Banana Jack. RCA jacks have the added benefit of taking up little space on the inside of the unit. This is very important when circuit bending small electronic devices that often have very little extra space in their cases.      After the Toys installation was shown at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo, the interface was redesigned to feature 16 rotary knobs with built in push buttons and RGB34 LEDs. I replaced the SPST35 toggle switches with large sleeker metal pushbuttons, also with LED’s inside. The current interface is powered by an Arduino Mega and can be either batter powered or powered via USB. It functions both as a controller for specially hacked toys or electronic devices or as a useful tool for hardware hacking and circuit probing/bending. It is designed specifically for working with low voltage DC circuits and can’t handle anything high voltage or high current. Its first eight output channels are PWM36 waves each with a pot controlling intensity (PW) and a switch to cut off the current flow entirely. The first eight outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation.      The next five outputs are very similar to the first eight with the noticeable exception that they have no feedback LEDs, no on/off switches and are arranged on the interface in a separate group. They are intended to be used to control motors in bent devices, or any other bend in which you desire a constant current and don’t want the output to be effected by the master delay pot. When Toys was presented at the Digital Arts Expo these outputs controlled the talking robotic bear. In the rear of the device all 13 outputs are accessible via RCA connectors, with the ring connected to a common ground and the internal pin the hot signal. In addition, there is one additional RCA connection in which both the ring and pin are connected to ground, to allow for easier probing and bending.4.6.2 The Voltage Slammer – Interaction DesignThe front and sides of the interface has built in ultra-sonic rangefinders granting the interface a rough since of spacial awareness. This proved especially beneficial when the interface was used in an installation setting. When the installation is idol, it will remain off for just under a minute before pulsing all its channels, basically calling out for interactees, it will continue repeating this cycle until someone approaches in which it will turn itself on. Thanks to its ultrasonic rangefinder the Voltage Slammer was aware of the presence of humans. When no-one was near the device the device entered into a resting state. It stopped sending continuous signals to its circuit bent minions and was mostly silent, allowing the toys to complete the cycles they might have been currently engaged in. The Voltage Slammer will then proceed to randomly pulse one of the devices every two minutes. This is an act to silicate attention from anyone in the gallery. Once the presence of a body is detected by the voltage slammer the device will enter into its active state; again sending messages out to its toys.	The result of the Voltage Slammers interaction with its circuit bent toys was in a state of constant flux: it was hard to predict what the actual results might be from one sitting to another. The system would behave differently if there were 5 devices connected or 10 devices as each new device that was added changed the electronic properties of the system. 4.6.3 OneToFour – Interface DescriptionOneToFour allows for a single SNES remote controller to control up to four different SNES consoles at the same time. Just like the, Symbiotic SNES interface OneToFour has two female jakcs for any SNES compatable controller. As oppose to the SSNES interface which has an output for each of the input controllers, OneToFour has a total of eight output ports. The Arduino Mega that controls the device is housed in a small clear plastic box, so that its feedback LED’s, one for each button, can be viewed if desired.4.6.4 OneToFour - Interaction DesignFigure 28: OneToFour installed in a private residence in 2016.OneToFour, the object, does not offer any form of user control. In fact, the interface is not really an interface as much as it is a means to an end. The interaction is result of the way we adapt to the situation. It is an interface because it forces us to interact with the game and the controller in a way that is different that if we had the device, it also allows us to control things that we would not be able to control otherwise.  4.7 ConclusionThis chapter presented six different approaches for the design of interfaces for human circuit interaction. Terminology was proposed to describe how each of these devices are interacted with in regards to direct human circuit interaction. Interfaces that have been built using the design approaches were presented as examples of how these design approaches can be adopted in real world interface design. Each of the interfaces were design with a specific interaction scenario in mind and were either custom designed for an installation or were created as an experiment in interaction. How users interact with the device and their electrical systems was discussed for each interface in terms of their design goals. 	Collectively, these interfaces and design approaches are explorations in our relationship with electrical systems. They strive to invite us to minimalize our distance from the electrical systems we prevalently use and to rethink our relationships, interactions, and co-existence with electrical systems.Chapter 5 Approaches to Human-Robot PerformanceThis chapter addresses four different approaches to creating Human-Robot performances. Humans Leading Intelligent Mechatronic Instrumentalists, discusses performances that are human-lead but involve reactive, intelligent mechatronic performers as well. The next section, Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Humans discusses performances where the music was written for mechatronic instrumentalists to perform but for humans to listen to and enjoy. This is contrasted by the next section, Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves which covers performances that are written within the perceptual and/or aesthetic frame of the mechatronic instrumentalists themselves, with the human enjoyment secondary. This idea is compounded and distilled in the fourth section: Exclusive Robot-Centric Performances which explores performances that are disrupted by the presence of humans, that are intended only for mechatronic personalities.        Examining human-mechatronic performances in terms of agency and role affords unique opportunities to analyze performance opportunities when it comes to these events. Mechatronics systems by definitions.PerformanceHuman Role – During PerformanceComposerMechatronic RoleCategory of PerformanceRobot WhispersBeatlesinstrumentRobot Improvisational JamInstrumentalistinstrumentMechatronic Instruments Played by HumansHedonism BotInstrumentalistMechatronic Instrumentalists performing with HumanHello HumansNoneInstrumentHeadless Mechatronic	Table 4: Approaches to mechatronic perfromance.5.1 Mechatronic Instruments, Instrumentalists, Personalities, and Digital Co-Composers“A robotic musical instrument is a sound-making device that automatically creates music with the use of mechanical parts, such as motors, solenoids and gears.”[41, p. 1] This section defines, compares, and contrasts mechatronic instruments, mechatronic instrumentalists, and mechatronic personalities.5.1.1 Mechatronic InstrumentThe mechatronic instrument is the base line that other configurations are compared to. A mechatronic instrument is played, just as any other instrument might be played. It has notes written for it, and a program tells it what to play. The instruments are unaware of who is in the room, the reactions of their environment, the drifting tempo, or anything else about their environment and state of being: just like a guitar is unaware of these things. The Machine Lab at CalArts is a perfect example of an ensemble of mechatronic instruments[31]. These robots can be controlled through a central server in a variety of ways, but do not themselves exhibit any awareness of their surroundings or intelligent actions. Mechatronic instruments can be played either in real time by using some digital interface or can be controlled by code that is started the manner in which they are controlled is secondary to the fact that they are intended to be controlled directly by humans. 5.1.2 Mechatronic InstrumentalistA mechatronic instrumentalist is a mechatronic instrument that is able to exercise some degree of agency over its performance parameters without direct human input in real time. Mechatronic Instrumentalists include mechatronic instruments with feedback systems that allow them to adjust their performance on the fly as well as mechatronic instruments that utilize machine learning to react to other performers and the events on stage. What makes a mechatronic instrumentalist an instrumentalist instead of the instrument is autonomy and the ability to make decisions, just as a human instrumentalist is required to do. It is not the hardware configuration of the robot, but instead how the robot uses its hardware. [TODO: sentence about existing examples of mechatronic instrumentalists].[42]5.1.3 Mechatronic PersonalityA mechatronic entity that exhibits traits of intelligence, preference, and personality. Mechatronic personalities can also be a Mechatronic Instrument but does not have to be. They make decisions based on personality traits that area not intrinsically linked to music performance. They are in-fact not designed to be instruments, but instead make sound that can be considered music during their operation. The robots utilized in the installation No Humans Allowed discussed in xxxx xxxx are examples of mechatronic personalities. Other examples include xxx and xxxxx designed by Eric Heep in 2015-16.5.1.4 Digital Co-ComposerWhenever human composers relinquish playback control to a computational entity they are relying on a digital co-composer. This includes the use of random numbers, API’s or other web services, and many algorhithms. Digital Co-Composers are very common, especially in compositions that are written using a text based coding languages. Just as in Jazz the composer leaves a good deal of room for the players to freely interperate the song and play within its guidelines. Digital Co-Composers allow composers of electronic music to relinquish some of the specifics of the interpretation of a composition to the players. 5.2 The Pantheon Mechatronic SystemPantheon is a mechatronic art system that is an adaptation of the MTIID servers and hardware that controls the mechatronic instruments residing in the Machine Lab at CalArts. The system is structured to be modular, flexible, and easy to learn and provides the technological core of my mechatronic installations. This section provides an overview of the software and hardware systems that make up the Pantheon Mechatronic System.5.2.1 The ServerThe Machine Lab has a dedicated server for networking the mechatronic instruments with student and instructor clients. The server is programmed in the ChucK language and is host to nine mechatronic instruments, as well as any number of student and instructor clients.       When the server is initialized, it launches a handshake routine that requests an identification number (ID) from each USB device connected to the server computer. Mechatronic instruments connected to the computer respond with their unique ID. The server uses this ID to assign a corresponding OSC address to the instrument’s USB port number. After the initialization and handshake is complete, the server starts listening on the network. If the server recognizes a valid OSC address that also includes valid arguments, it proceeds to forward the message to the appropriate instrument using either serial or HIDUINO communication protocols [21]. This simple yet flexible system allows for the easy addition of any number of clients while also providing a standardization for interfacing with the instruments.5.2.2 ClientsStudents and instructors are able to join the dedicated network either wirelessly or directly via one of the many Ethernet jacks lining the Machine Lab’s walls. Clients who wish to use MIDI for their command protocol are able to download the MIDI-to-OSC ChucK program pro-vided by the department. The program automatically maps MIDI running through a virtual bus on the client’s computer to OSC output the server expects. Consequently, students are able to control the Machine Lab’s instruments with any environment that is capable of trans-mitting MIDI over a virtual bus, or OSC messages over a network. This gives composers the freedom to control the mechatronic instruments in whatever environment they are most creative.5.2.3 Mechatronic Instrument EndpointsEach of the mechatronic instruments are assigned an end-point by the network during the handshake. The expected structure of a matching OSC message is standardized to be “/botname i,i” where “botname” is the name of the instrument, the first argument is an integer that corresponds to the actuator number on the instrument, and the second argument is an integer which corresponds to the velocity of the event. 5.2.4 ServerFigure 29: The Pantheon Server initialization routine.[NV13] The Pantheon server is written in ChucK[43]–[45] and utilizes a variety of shielded Arduino Uno and Mega clients. Upon initialization, the server uses a handshake routine to determine the client configuration. If sensor Arduinos are found the server will start a separate process that listens to sensors found on the network. If actuator Arduinos are found the server will determine the hierarchy between all of the clients. If groups of Arduinos are found together they will be linked under a single OSC address in addition to their individual addresses.  Once the server is running, a supplementary pythons script can be run to convert MIDI messages found on an internal IAC bus into the OSC messages that The Pantheon understands. This allows for the actuators to be controlled by any programming language, or program that is able to output either MIDI or OSC messages. When the server is initialized, it launches a handshake routine that requests an identification number (ID) from each USB device connected to the server computer. Mechatronic instruments connected to the computer respond with their unique ID. The server uses this ID to assign a corresponding OSC address to the instrument’s USB port number. After the initialization and handshake is complete, the server starts listening on the network. If the server recognizes a valid OSC address that also includes valid arguments, it proceeds to forward the message to the appropriate instrument using either serial or HIDUINO  communication protocols  [46]. This simple yet flexible system allows for the easy addition of any number of clients while also providing a standardization for interfacing with the instruments.5.2.4.1 Sensors[NV14]When the server is initialized, a shred is sporked37 which infinitely polls the appropriate microcontrollers for their sensor readings. The microcontrollers respond with the states of their sensors which undertake preprocessing before being stored by the personality process. 5.2.4.2 Digital ConductorThe digital conductor orchestrates the overall activity of each of the mechatronic personalities as well as acting as a conduit for communication between the mechatronic personalities. While the mechatronic personalities each keep tracks of their own actuator shields, the digital conductor keeps tabs on the states of each of the personalities and has executive control over the personalities meta behavior. While the digital conductor is concerned with the behavior of each of the personalities, it does not exhibit direct control over what the personalities are doing just as an orchestral conductor does not play a violin or piano during a concert. The conductor is not a part of the personalities directly, but instead acts as the glue that binds their communication and interaction to the world.5.2.4.3 HandshakeEach of the Pantheon bots utilize the same handshake routine to sort out what Arduino corresponds to which personality or mechatronic instrument. The server sends a handshake message to each of the Arduinos attached to the host. The Arduinos recognize the message as a handshake and respond with three bytes. The first byte is the ID of the personality that the microcontroller belongs to, the second byte corresponds to the type of shield the Arduino is equipped with, while the third byte is the Arduinos personal ID. 5.2.4.4 OSCThe server uses Open SoundControl (OSC) messages to orchestrate control between different clients and servers.[47] For installations that utilize the mechatronic personality architecture, the expected OSC messages for communicating with the different shields are defined as “/xyz/n/v” where:x= The personality numbery = the board type (1: Brigid, 2: Homados, 3: Hermes, 4: Theia)z= board number of that type within the personalityn= note (0-63)v= velocity (0-1023)5.2.5 ShieldsThere are many different shield that have been designed for use with the Pantheon system. While the functionality of each board differs, they all share a grouping of common traits:• All connectors used are Molex Mini-Fit Jr. which can handle up to 9.0Amps, feature fully isolated terminals, locking housings, low engagement forces, and polarized housings.• All boards are designed to be shields for either the Arduino Uno or Arduino Mega.• The ‘tops’ of all the connectors are always ground.• All boards have a RGB LED that is red while booting, yellow until it completes its handshake, and blue while receiving a message.5.2.5.1 BrigidFigure 30: Brigid Actuator Shield.[NV15]Brigid is the smallest of the two general purpose actuator shields38 and is designed for use with the Arduino Uno microcontroller.[48] Brigid has a RGB status LED, a I2C port[49], six channels of actuator control39, and an input jack for an external power source. Each of the channels utilize a Pulse Width Modification (PWM) pin on the Arduino instead of a simple digital pin for added flexibility and control.[50]Figure 31: Single Actuator Channel[NV16]      The Brigid shield, as well as the larger Homados solenoid driver employ the same circuit for each of their channels of actuator control. The configuration utilizes a N-Channel Enhancement Mode Field Effect Transistor to control the actuators. The gate of the transistor is connected to one of the Arduino Uno’s PWM pins with a 1k resistor in series. The resistor limits the current draw for each pin putting less strain on the Arduino [TODO, does this also make the transistor gate actually work?]. The transistor drain is connected to the positive end of the jack. There is a 1N4004 clamp diode with a path to PWR that protect the transistor from any inductive fly-back current from solenoids.[51] Both the Brigid and Homados controller boards use this same circuit for each of their channels. The AOT460 N-Channel MOSFET transistors40 are able to safely handle loads of up to 60Volts and 85Amps giving the system enough headroom to handle most DC solenoids, relays, motors, and lights.[52]5.2.5.2 HomadosFigure 32: Homados Actuator ShieldHomados is the larger of the two actuator controller shields in the Pantheon system and is designed for use with the Arduino Mega microcontroller. The board supports sixteen channels of actuator control, three I2C jacks, and a RGB status LED. The first fifteen channels of the Homados driver utilizes PWM while the sixteenth channel uses a standard digital pin. The Homados is intended to function as a larger version of the Brigid shield and is to be used when six channels of control are inadequate.5.2.5.3 HermesFigure 33: Hermes Stepper DriverHermes is an Arduino Uno shield designed to control stepper motors. The Hermes shield provides the Arduino with an interface to two XXXx Darlington Arrays that each contain 8 Darlington pairs. These IC’s afford control over up to four stepper motors that are either xxx or xxx. In addition to the Darlington arrays, and output jacks, Hermes also includes a single I2C channel, a RGB status LED, and two power jacks: one for the motors, and the other for the Arduino.5.2.5.4 TheiaTheia is a general purpose sensor board designed specifically for interfacing either SR-04 ultrasonic rangefinders.41 The shield features eight channels of control for the rangefinders as well as a RGB status LED. Although Theia was specifically designed for use with SR-04 rangefinders the shield can also be used for other sensors, and actuators that can be controlled with 5v and low currents.5.3 Mechatronic Instruments played by HumansThis section presents the Robots Improvisation Jam as an example of a human-mechatronic performance that only utilizes mechatronic instruments. Although the mechatronic instruments were controlled with varying granularity42 using a variety of programming languages and physical interfaces the instruments were always being directly controlled by human performers.5.3.1 Robots Improvisational JamFigure 34: Composition for Robots 2014 final improvisational jam.[NV17]This group improvisational music performance featured eight student performers each improvising with a variety of mechatronic instruments, digital synthesis engines, audio feedback, and traditional string instruments. The mechatronic instruments in the machine lab were all controlled by the performers using a variety of interfaces including grid controllers, laptops, and microphones. Throughout the performance, the rhythmic, harmonic, and melodic content is dictated by the actions of the human performers. The robotics do not exhibit agency over their actions.5.4 Non-Interactive PerformancesThis section presents three different compositions using mechatronic instruments that perform without the guidance of human performers. These compositions follow the “press play and sit down” presentation of the majority of electro-acoustic, computer, and electronic music.[53] There is no interaction between the human composer and the mechatronic performers, nor is there any communication between the different mechatronic performers.      Unlike compositions that utilize mechatronic instruments played by humans, when mechatronic instruments are played without the presence of any other human performers on stage a completely different stage dynamic emerges. Akin the many electro-acoustic music performances, the technology and the composer take center stage and the expectations for a visual experience are diminished. There is less centralization of audience attention and people are more likely to close their eyes a listen to the music.5.4.1 Beatles[NV18]Beatles is an eight-minute etude written for MalleOTon and Lydia that is performed in a concert setting. The piece begins very quietly with many low velocity messages being randomly sent to Lydia the mechatronic piano. Each individual actuation is barely noticeable and only produces minute mechanical flutters, not even approaching the required force to strike the strings on the piano. The rate and overall velocity of these message slowly increase over a period of a minute after which time MalleOTon begins to exhibit the same behavior which starts the cycle at the beginning. The two instruments trade off several times, progressively getting louder and faster. As the actuations approach the point of striking the strings or keys both of the instruments become active together. At no point is a single message strong enough to activate either instruments sound making device, however, after approximately six minutes into the composition some solenoids are able to strike their key or string when two messages are received in short succession.        triggers each of the actuators on the instruments alternatively at first until the second half of the composition where they are both actuated at once. Each of the note-on messages, however, are being sent at velocities that are below what is required to strike either the bars or strings. Throughout the course of the composition the velocities slowly increase and the interval between messages decreases. Even at its apex, no single message from the server contains a velocity that is strong enough to sound the instrument on its own. However, because the messages are sent to random notes,	Beatles is coded in the ChucK programming language. As the composition relies heavily of random number generators and the narrow gap where an actuator makes noise but does not strike its sound making mechanism each time the composition is actualized the performance will vary. Although the sonic result will vary with each performance, the result of this variance is the result of the digital co-composer and not the mechatronic instrument itself. Therefore, this composition still only utilizes Mechatronic Instruments.  5.4.2 Hello HumansHello Humans is a 5-minute-long composition written for xxx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx and xxx. Hello Humans explores precise rhythmic modulations throughout the course of the installation and specialization throughout the Machine Lab and is performed in a concert setting. The composition is through-composed in Ableton Live and will result in the same note messages each time it is run. The composition is static and does not utilize any digital co-composer. Throughout the course of the composition the temp is constantly changing, never remaining static at any point. The constant tempo changes and subtle builds and slows would have been impossible for human performers to execute. The piece is partly an exploration in how perceptible these constant changes in tempo would be to the listener. Hello Humans begins with the chime of a single bell on MahaDeviBot Bot. As the reverberations from the bell fades, BreakBot’s snare brush slowly starts to rub on the head of the snare. Bells, chimes, and cymbals quietly accompany the brush as the tempo slowly climbs. As the tempo increases other percussion instruments quietly join in. [TODO] Listen to the piece and finish describing what is going on.	Hello Humans could not have been performed by human performers due to complexities in its rhythmic and tempo changes. It presents the robots foremost and they are the sole performers not having to share the stage with humans. It makes use of specialization and the fact that the instruments are spread throughout the space, with several robots hanging above the audience member heads. 5.4.3 Computer Music When Computer Music was shown at the Digital Arts Expo it was installed and active between 12:00PM and 8:00PM. Throughout the day the ensemble performed a single composition that could only have been performed with the precision of mechatronic instrumentalists. The intention of the piece was not for gallery goers to stay for the entire composition. It was not presented as a concert performance, but instead as an installation, regardless for the mechatronic instruments the installation was absolutely a performance of a single composition. It being presented as an installation had nothing to do with the mechatronics not performing a song or musical performance: on the contrary. Instead, it had to be presented as an installation due to the limitations of human attention span and temporal observance. ????XXX???      Just because these pieces are conceived as for the enjoyment of the robots, does not exclude humans from observing the performance and formulating their own appreciation. What makes these works for the bot is the fact that humans are either not intended and are unable to experience the unaltered composition (in the case of NHA) or, in the case of Computer Music, the composition is written on a scale that is not aligned with a human’s temporal orientation.5.5 Humans Interacting with Robots in Musical PerformancesRobots Whispers and Hedonism Bot are two examples of musical performances that present reactive mechatronic systems which listen for input from human performers to determine their respective course of action. In both of the piece both humans and robots share the approach to human-robot interaction differ. In Robot Whispers, the mechatronics are subservient to the humans while in Hedonism Bot the human performers are subservient to the robot. Robot Whispers43 had an ensemble of seven mechatronic instrumentalists react to the whisperings of a single human performer. Hedonism Bot44, alternatively, used a single mechatronic personality that reacted to the physical proximity of three human performers.5.5.1 Robot Whispers - Performance Description[NV19]Robot Whispers was composed in collaboration with Eric Heep45 and Danny Clarke46. Throughout the course of the performance a text score is algorithmically generated by a program in real time. The score contains information about the word that should be spoken and the tone in which it should be uttered. Eric and Danny followed the text score and quietly spoke the words into personal microphones that were processed with reverb and delay before being amplified and sent through quad sound into the performance space. The microphones have a STFT performed on the input spectrum in real time. The system split the spectrum up into three bands each representing the high, mid, and low frequencies. My job throughout the course of the performance is to use a Mini-Korg controller to control a threshold for each of the three frequency bins. If the overall amplitude of the band is higher than the threshold that I set, the robots will chime in and play with us: attempting to echo our language. Three groups are made with the robots in the Machine Lab dividing up their various actuator into a high, medium and low group. Each of the three actuator groups are mapped to the FFT groups so that each FFT group corresponds to its equivalent actuator group.5.6 Mechatronic Personality Social PerformancesThis section discusses No Humans Allowed as an installation that creates a community of mechatronic personalities, each with their own rules of (hostile) interaction. Although the resulting sounds of the installation is rhythmic and could be classified as musical under some definitions any music qualities are simply a byproduct of the social interaction taking place in the gallery. 5.6.1 Mechatronic PersonalitiesFigure 35: Model A and Model B mechatronic personalities.The author has created three mechatronic personalities for the purpose of exploring human-mechatronic interaction. There are two models of personalities: model A and model B. Both of the models are approximately five feet tall, are constructed primarily from extruded aluminum, are powered by the Pantheon Mechatronic Art System, have an ultrasonic rangefinder poised at all four of its sides, features dozens of solenoids and LED strips. Model A (figure 35, left) has six rotary solenoids, six large push-pull solenoids, and six smaller push-pull solenoids. None of the solenoids serve any explicate musical or mechanic purpose: the rotary solenoids are hanging in air while the small and large push-pull solenoids simply bang against the aluminum skeleton. Model B (figure 35, right) does not have rotary solenoids but instead features sixteen additional push-pull solenoids banging on the sides of the bot in addition to the top as seen in Model A. Although there are two Model B personalities, the two differ from each other in their assembly and construction.	Apart from their differences, the personalities have many things in common. Each of the personalities have its own seven-channel powered USB hub which allows for the five Arduinos required to control all of the sensors, solenoids, and LED’s to be controlled with a single USB cable. To accommodate the LED strips, as well as the different sizes and types of solenoids, each of the bots contains a 15amp 24V and a 30amp 12V switching power supply. The USB hub, and two power supplies, are plugged into a power strip allowing each bot to be powered with a single extension cable. To help with mobility, the personalities each have casters allowing them to be easily pushed around. 5.6.2 AntiSocialAntiSocial was the first performance that featured a mechatronic personality. In AntiSocial, a Model A personality is given the behavior of Craig and forced to interact with gallery viewers for several hours during the Fall 2016 MTIID Masters Show. Craig suffers from severe social anxiety and is poor as communicating and socializing with both robots and humans. When no-one was directly interacting with Craig he attempted to psych himself up, trying to build his confidence for the inevitable social encounter. As Craig sees someone approaching him, all his confidence fades and he is unable to speak, retreating into himself. If someone gets close enough that Craig is unable to ignore them he does his best to interact. Unfortunately, things go from bad to worse for Craig as he fumbles for the correct words, loudness, and pose. 	These interaction scenarios manifested themselves sonically as follows. When Craig was unable to detect someone that was within 8 feet of where he was standing he would rhythmically trigger his solenoids in sequence. To represent him building his confidence the time between strikes slowly decreased as the velocity of the strikes slowly increased. When Craig detected someone was getting closer to him, he would effectively shut down and go silent: only rarely activating one of his solenoids or LED’s. Lastly, as Craig detected someone within two feet of where he was standing he would attempt to converse. As he is very bad at articulating his feelings the results are an arrhythmic splattering of loud, abrupt, and inappropriate solenoid strikes accompanied by excessively bright strobing light. 	AntiSocial was the authors first exploration into imbuing human personality traits, in this case shyness and social anxiety, onto a mechatronic entity. This piece is not a musical performance, nor is it an interactive art installation. Instead it is a performance of social interaction akin to dramatology.5.6.3 Hedonism Bot – Performance DescriptionFigure 36: xxxx xxxx feeding the Hedonism Bot during a performance of Hedonism Bot.Hedonism Bot is a musical ritual that is performed in a concert setting. One of the Model A mechatronic personalities is given the characteristics of “Hedonism Bot”. Hedonism Bot, throughout the course of the seven-minute improvisation, is fed the sounds of human performers who bow to the robots and present their offerings one at a time. As Hedonism Bot feeds it activates its solenoids for longer and louder with each meal. Eventually Hedonism Bot has been fed enough to come to life and the social dynamics of the performance shift. Instead of the human performers leading the pace and narrative of the ritual, Hedonism bot takes the lead and cycles through its actuators. As the humans fade their iPads out, Hedonism bot takes the audience through the outro before the composition comes to a close.      This is the performance where we feed the bot. Talk about the dangers of the performance space and how it forced us to “wizard of Oz” the live performance. The following citation covers the Wizard of Oz effect.[6, pp. 43–44]5.6.4 No Humans AllowedNo Humans Allowed is the final piece discussed in this document which utilizes the authors mechatronic personalities. While AntiSocial and Hedonism Bot both only used a single Model A personality NHA uses one Model A personality in addition to two Model B personalities to create a community of xenophobic robots that reside in the gallery. Bot becomes AggressiveBot becomes SurveillanceBot becomes ProductiveOther bot is AggressiveNo effectNo effectNo effectOther Bot is SurveillanceNo effectNo effectNo effectOther Bot is ProductiveForces into state of SurveillanceDecreases productivityIncreases productivity levelTable 5: How one bots state change effects the other bots in the installation.[NV20]	Similar to the interaction seen in AntiSocial each of the personalities have a total of three states, or moods. When no outsides are detected in the gallery the personalities are in their productive, happy state. They rhythmically activate their solenoids simulating a fully functioning productive state of mind. If a personality detects an outside presence in the gallery, their productivity steeply declines as the personality is so preoccupied with the outsider. This state is the surveillance state or cautious mood. If one of the personalities notices an outsider they also alert the other bots, who also enter into a state of surveillance, but with a higher productivity rating that the bot who sounded the alarm. The last state is activated if an outside ventures too close to a robot. The personality turns hostile as it flashes its light (which are dormant in other states) and slams its solenoids in a disturbingly loud and arrhythmic way. The hostile personality alerts the other personalities in the gallery who each enter into a full state of surveillance.	Just like AntiSocial, NHA is not a musical performance nor is it really an installation. Instead it is a performance of social interaction, fear, and isolationism.      To communicate with each other the three personalities are networked together through a Pantheon server running on an iMac.5.7 ConclusionIn this chapter, the authors terms Mechatronic Instrument, Mechatronic Instrumentalist, Mechatronic Personality, and Digital Co-Composer were presented. Next, the hardware and software of The Pantheon system for mechatronic art was introduced. Additionally, five approaches to human-mechatronic performance were discussed in terms of mechatronic agency, reactiveness, and human-robot interaction. Each of these approaches were actualized in the form of installations, compositions, and performances which were discussed.  Chapter 6 Conclusion6.1 SummaryThis document discusses a portion of the work created by Nathan Villicaña-Shaw during his tenure as a MFA student at CalArts. The projects presented in this thesis are all different ways the author has approached questioning, exploring, and examining human-circuit interaction. Through the completion of these projects the author has refined his approach to interaction design not through a process of iteration on a singular idea but instead by exploring a different approach with each project. The variety of lenses in which to view the same topic has afforded a clarity in values, approach, and aesthetics to the authors artistic practice. 6.2 Primary ContributionsThis thesis presented a wide variety of interfaces, installations, and performances created by the author during his graduate studies at CalArts. Each of these projects feature human-circuit interaction as a focus, but approach the topic with different values. This document analyzed the contained projects in terms of interaction between humans and electronic systems.       The majority of research in interaction design is conducted by industrial designers, product designers, web engineers, or computer scientists working to the end of creating easy to use, but fixable ways to interact with technology. The work presented in this document attempted to break free from the trends of conventional interaction in terms of performance art, interface design, and interactive installations.  This collection of work does not value one approach to interaction to another but instead seeks to provoke a dialogue into the merits of variety.6.3 Final Thoughts      This corpus of work is inspired by the author’s fascination with electricity, magnetism, and how we as humans have harnessed electro-magnetism to run the world around us. In the 21st century, it is nearly impossible to avoid digital technology in the day-to-day grind. The work discussed in this thesis seeks to re-open the discussion of how we interact with electrical systems on the most fundamental way. It hopes to invite participants to ask how their bodies electrical properties coexist and affect the electromagnetic devices that are so vital to modern life. The goal of the art presented in this thesis is to invite us to question how we interact not only with electrical systems and digital devices, but with everyone and everything in the world around us. I hope to present these interactive scenarios in a manner where people are empowered to discover the experience themselves and to look for new ways to interact with the world around them in a broad sense.Bibliography[1]	N. Wiener, The human use of human beings: cybernetics and society. New York, N.Y: Da Capo Press, 1988.[2]	K. Kwastek, Aesthetics of interaction in digital art. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2013.[3]	W. R. ASHBY, INTRODUCTION TO CYBERNETICS. Place of publication not identified: MARTINO FINE Books, 2015.[4]	B. Moggridge, Designing interactions. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2007.[5]	C. Paul, Digital art, Third edition. London: Thames & Hudson, 2015.[6]	Jay David Bolter and Diane Gromala, Windows and Mirrors: Interaction Design, Digital Art, and the Myth of Transparency. 2003.[7]	“The War of the Currents: AC vs. DC Power,” Energy.gov. [Online]. Available: http://www.energy.gov/articles/war-currents-ac-vs-dc-power. [Accessed: 14-Nov-2016].[8]	C. A. Mack, “Fifty Years of Moore’s Law,” IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 202–207, May 2011.[9]	“Leonardo da Vinci | Italian artist, engineer, and scientist | Britannica.com.” [Online]. Available: https://www.britannica.com/biography/Leonardo-da-Vinci. [Accessed: 15-Feb-2017].[10]	M. E. Moran, “The da Vinci Robot,” J. Endourol., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 986–990, Dec. 2006.[11]	T. J. Misa, Leonardo to the Internet: technology & culture from the Renaissance to the present, 2nd ed. Baltimore [Md.]: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011.[12]	A. M. Fernandez and F. Iazzetta, “Circuit-Bending and the DIY Culture,” Escole Communivações E Artes Universidade São Paulo, 2011.[13]	J. A. Paradiso, J. Heidemann, and T. G. Zimmerman, “Hacking Is Pervasive,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 13–15, Jul. 2008.[14]	Motherboard, Reed Ghazala, the Father of Circuit Bending: Sound Builders. .[15]	“Ghazala.” .[16]	“Circuit_Bending_Build_Your_Own_Alien_Instruments.pdf.” .[17]	“Ghazala.” [Online]. Available: http://www.anti-theory.com/bio/. [Accessed: 15-Feb-2017].[18]	A. Galloway, J. Brucker-Cohen, L. Gaye, E. Goodman, and D. Hill, “Design for hackability,” 2004, p. 363.[19]	A. McPherson and V. Zappi, “Exposing the scaffolding of digital instruments with hardware-software feedback loops,” in Proceedings of the international conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2015, pp. 162–167.[20]	M. A. Net, “Media Art Net | Kubisch, Christina: Sound Flow Light Source – Forty Pillars and One Room,” 05-Oct-2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.medienkunstnetz.de/works/klang-fluss-licht/. [Accessed: 05-Oct-2016].[21]	R. Ghazala, Circuit-bending: build your own alien instruments. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2005.[22]	“Peter Blasser (biography).” [Online]. Available: http://www.fondation-langlois.org/html/e/page.php?NumPage=372. [Accessed: 28-Apr-2017].[23]	A. P. McPherson, A. Chamberlain, A. Hazzard, S. McGrath, and S. Benford, “Designing for Exploratory Play with a Hackable Digital Musical Instrument,” 2016, pp. 1233–1245.[24]	Jim Murphy, Ajay Kapur, and Dale Carnegie, “Musical Robotics in a Loudspeaker World: Developments in Alternative Approaches to Localization and Spatialization,” Leonardo Music J., vol. 22, pp. 41–48, 2012.[25]	Alicia M. Gibb, “New Media Art, Design, and the Arduino Microcontroller: A Malleable Tool,” M.S. Thesis, Dept. Art & Design, Pratt Institute, New York, N.Y., 2010.[26]	G. Celani, “Digital fabrication in the arts: just another technical reproduction advance leap or a new artistic revolution,” Vrtual Rapid Prototyp., vol. 2007, 2007.[27]	P. Catanese and A. Geary, Post-digital printmaking: CNC, traditional and hybrid techniques. London: A. & C. Black, 2012.[28]	L. Maes, G.-W. Raes, and T. Rogers, “The Man and Machine Robot Orchestra at Logos,” Comput. Music J., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 28–48, 2011.[29]	A. Kapur and M. Darling, “A Pedagogical Paradigm for Musical Robotics.,” in NIME, 2010, pp. 162–165.[30]	A. Kapur, J. Murphy, M. Darling, E. Heep, B. Lott, and N. Morris, “MalletOTon and the Modulets: Modular and Extensible Musical Robots,” New Interfaces Music. Expr., pp. 69–72, 2016.[31]	A. Kapur et al., “The Machine Orchestra,” in ICMC, 2010.[32]	A. Kapur et al., “The Machine Orchestra: An Ensemble of Human Laptop Performers and Robotic Musical Instruments,” Comput. Music J., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 49–63, Dec. 2011.[33]	“Super Nintendo Entertainment System,” Wikipedia. 12-Apr-2017.[34]	J. Ryan, Super Mario: how Nintendo conquered America. New York: Portfolio Penguin, 2011.[35]	D. Adams, The ultimate hitchhiker’s guide: [five complete novels and one story], Complete & unabridged. New York: Gramercy Books, 2005.[36]	“SammyIAm/Moppy: Musical controller for an Arduino-floppy drive set up.” .[37]	“Drive Power Connectors.” .[38]	“Raspberry Pi GPIO Pin information.” [Online]. Available: http://www.thebox.myzen.co.uk/Raspberry/Understanding_Outputs.html. [Accessed: 16-Nov-2016].[39]	M. Puckette and others, “Pure Data: another integrated computer music environment,” Proc. Second Intercollege Comput. Music Concerts, pp. 37–41, 1996.[40]	“PAM8403.pdf.” .[41]	A. Kapur, “A History of Robotic Musical Instruments.,” presented at the International Computer Music Conference, 2005, vol. 31.[42]	G. Weinberg and S. Driscoll, “Toward Robotic Musicianship,” Comput. Music J., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 28–45, 2006.[43]	G. Wang, P. R. Cook, and S. Salazar, “Chuck: A Strongly Timed Computer Music Language,” Comput. Music J., 2016.[44]	G. Wang, A. Misra, A. Kapur, and P. R. Cook, “Yeah, ChucK it!⇒ dynamic, controllable interface mapping,” in Proceedings of the 2005 conference on New interfaces for musical expression, 2005, pp. 196–199.[45]	G. Wang, R. Fiebrink, and P. R. Cook, “Combining Analysis and synthesis in the Chuck Programming Language.,” presented at the International Computer Music Conference, 2007.[46]	D. Diakopoulos and A. Kapur, “HIDUINO: A firmware for building driverless USB-MIDI devices using the Arduino microcontroller.,” presented at the New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2011, pp. 405–408.[47]	“Open SoundControl: A New Protocol for Communicating with Sound Synthesizers.” [Online]. Available: http://cnmat.org/ICMC97/papers-html/OpenSoundControl.html. [Accessed: 04-Mar-2017].[48]	Y. A. Badamasi, “The working principle of an Arduino,” 2014, pp. 1–4.[49]	F. Leens, “An introduction to I2C and SPI protocols,” IEEE Instrum. Meas. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 8–13, Feb. 2009.[50]	M. Margolis, Arduino cookbook. Sebastopol, Calif.: O’Reilly, 2012.[51]	P. Scherz and S. Monk, Practical electronics for inventors, Third edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2013.[52]	Alpha & Omega Semiconductor Inc., “AOT460.pdf.” .[53]	B. Schrader, Introduction to electro-acoustic music. Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall, 1982.1 Do It Yourself – The method of building, modifying or repairing things without the direct aid of experts or professionals2 Printed Circuit Boards3 Including a robotic knight that was capable of sitting down, standing up, moving its head and lifting its visor in 1495.[10]4 saper vedere – “knowing how to see”: Leonardo believed that one’s eyes were the main avenue to knowledge and the skill of observation is of vital importance to any great scientist. 5 The second printing in 2009 specifically.6 He is editor-in-chief of the Leonardo Music Journal, and a Professor in the Department of Sound at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. 7 Christina used the term ‘electrical walk’ to describe the action of exploring a space’s EM properties by means of EM listening just as one might go on a nature walk. For her, the Electrical Walks are not only for other people to enjoy, but are also an activity she enjoys to do. 8 The Retrono, Discovery Synth, Voltage Slammer, and Modular SNES interfaces presented in Chapter 4 are examples.9 Founded in 1970 with Moniek Darge.10 Founded in 1968/1969. Current 2017 members are Godfreid-Williem Raes, Moniek Darge, Karin De Fielyt, Marc Maes, Stefaan Smagghe, Kris De Baerdemacker, and Kristof Lauwers. 11 All are actuated with solenoid beaters. The crash symbol has two dampening mechanisms. The snare has a brush, which can be rubbed on the membrane, as well as a beater.12 The glasses, xylophone, cymbals and drums are directly struck by tubular push-pull solenoids. The guitar and bass strings each have their own picking mechanism, a string dampener, and five possible fret positions.13 The term is inspired by rail shooters a genera of video game design where the player has no control over the majority of the movement their character makes, and is unable to freely explore the game environment..14 In video game design a game is considered to be “on-rail” if the manner the player travels is pre-determined on a line, as if literally on rails. This originally was done to allow for the use of high production backgrounds and higher quality pre-rendered graphics. Over time this technical approach to game design has become a stylistic one that still persists today. Examples of games that are on-rail include the Star Fox, Time Crisis, and The House of the Dead series.15 This helps with steps II, II and IV.16 Helping with steps II and III.17 Helping with steps I, III, and V.18 This primarily aids with step V by encouraging viewers to walk into the network of cables and to explore the interior of the space.19 Helping with I and II in the interaction rail.20 Helping with II and III in the interaction rail.          21 Cathode Ray Tubes was initially exhibited in the WaveCave Gallery at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia California from April 5th, 2016 through April 11th, 2016. Subsequently, the installation has been shown at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo and was installed in the Kadenze Inc. corporate headquarters in Valencia, California from May 2016 through May 2017.22 The program will separate the red, green, and blue channels from one other and average each channel over all the pixels in the image.23 A Cape for a Raspberry Pi is similar to what a Shield is to the Arduino. It Is a small printed circuit board that is designed to be attached to the GPIO headers of the Raspberry Pi and provides some sort of additional functionality usually though the use of IC’s and/or discrete electrical components.24 Normally this is someone pressing the button with their finger, but can also be pulling a lever, walking on a tile, or many other types of interaction events.25 Kanthal A-1 is a resistance heating wire commonly used for the heating element for electronic cigarettes. Kanthal is a ferritic iron-chromium-aluminum allow – FeCrAl alloy – and is characterized by high resistivity and good oxidation resistance.26 The circuit boards are exposed while the buttons, controller jacks and cartridge ports are removed.27 A black box is a device or system that is viewed in terms of its transfer characteristics (inputs and outputs) without any knowledge of its internal workings.28 The PAM8403 is a 3 watt, Class-D, stereo amplifier that is common and inexpensive.29 Budget interconnection company that is cost effective alternative to Molex. Most commonly seen with battery jacks and plugs in hobbyist projects.30 I do not recommend anyone does this themselves.31 Red, Green and Blue32 Single pole single throw : a switch that has two states and one channel33 Pulse Wave Modification: A high frequency digital signal that has a variable duty cycle allowing for a pseudo variable voltage.34 Red, Green and Blue35 Single pole single throw : a switch that has two states and one channel36 Pulse Wave Modification : A high frequency digital signal that has a variable duty cycle allowing for a pseudo variable voltage.37 Sporking a shred in ChucK creates a non-blocking concurnt subprocess that runs on the same virtual machine as the host program.38 Arduino shields are modular circuit boards that piggyback onto a specific Arduino model instilling the microcontroller with added functionality.39 For control of solenoids, DC motors, LED strips or other two-lead DC actuators.40 Manufactured by Alpha and Omega Semiconductor Inc.41 SR-04 Ultrasonic Rangefinders are a common sensor in my interfaces, installations, and mechatronics due to its cost efficiency and availability.42 note level vs. score level vs. clip level43 Performed fall 2015 with Eric Heep and Daniel Clarke in the CalArts Machine Lab.44 Performed fall 2016 with Kyle McCarthy, Ivy Liu, and Jake Turpin in the CalArts Machine Lab.45 CalArts 2016 – MFA MTIID Alum46 CalArts 2016 – MFA Composition Alum[NV1]intro had four sections:intro - 4 paragraphs, funnel down to thesis statement.-motivation - personal and in the field.-define overviewthen outline (with the singular picture as well)- interaction in gallery art is becoming more and more common- Often how we [NV2]Who are you? We’re immediately concerned about you +/or your work?[NV3]Need some sort of transistion into this section.[NV4]Should this be changed to Mechatronics? And then it talks about the history of mechatronics. It would have a subsection about mechatronic  music that takes up the bulk of it…[NV5]TODO – make this not crap perhaps?!? Talk about the works of Trimpin that are influential to my practice and why. Then talk about meeting trimpin and working with Trimpin.[NV6]Extend a little bit[NV7]This section needs a re-draft[NV8]Table needs to be updated for sure…[NV9]TODO – Expand on this![NV10]Yea this is crap…[NV11]Need to review[NV12]This can be stronger[NV13]This needs to be updated to more accurately reflect the current state of things….[NV14]Is there more to be said, or perhaps I should say nothing?[NV15]Will add picture of Arduino with shield on top next to the ciruit diagram.[NV16]Going to clean this up and possibly include other aspects of the circuitry?[NV17]Better picture on the way[NV18]This section is going to be rewritten after I update the composition to use windbot as well.[NV19]Image for this coming soon…[NV20]I know this table is a mess, will clean it up, and possibly add in another with the actions during each of the states.--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------xvi