California Institute of the ArtsElectromagnetic Translucenceartistic explorations in complicating, simplifying, and observing human-circuit interaction modalitiesbyNathan Villicaña-ShawA thesis submitted in partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Fine ArtsHerb Alpert School of MusicMusic Technology: Interaction, Intelligence & Design2017
Supervisory CommitteeDr. Ajay Kapur							MentorDr. Owen Vallis						Committee MemberDr. Spencer Salazar							Committee Member

AbstractThis thesis presents a variety of approaches for complicating, simplifying or exposing human circuit interaction within the context of interactive installation art, interface design, and mechatronic performance. The goal of this research is twofold: first is to develop new techniques for creating situations with electronic devices[NV1] and embew a since of discovery, wonder, and wilder;  second is to develop a vernacular for navigating human-circuit interaction within the context of the gallery. These methods provide a lens in which to view, discuss, and interperate interactive art.[NV2]	After a brief background of related work, this thesis presents several different approaches to human-circuit interaction in the gallery with example installations. Next a variety of different approaches to electronic interface design are presented along with their corresponding motivations. A sampling of mechatronic performances and a recontexualization of some of the previously discusses works are discussed in the next section. After the Conclusion an appendix is included to provide a sampling of code, implementation, construction, and secondary themes.The primary goals of this work include (1) presenting a corpus of work that is concerned with human-circuit interaction modalities (2) exploring the creation and dissolution of abstractions separating us from circuitry (3) exploring the idea of mechatronic/electronic personalities (4) exploring performances that feature mechatronic performers performing for an mechatronic audience.
AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank my loving, and supportive, family that have always belived in my abilities and have given me the freedom to explore what interests me. My mentors, Ajay Kapur and Owen Vallis who have alwys haf my best interest in mind and who have given me the chance  to prove myself and my abilities.To all the professors, instructors, and faculty at CalArts who have guided, inspired and motivated me throughout the past four years. Tom Jennings for helping me to break free from the technology in my art. Sarah Roberts for helping me to start thinking about space, sound, and interaction in new ways. Spencer Salizar, for his XXXX. Clay Chaplin for xxxx. Jordan for xxxx.All the friends and coleagues that I have studied, collaborated, and learned from throughout the years. Meason for inspiring me to think in larger scale, and for his respectful grace as an artist and human. Amber for xxxx. David Howe for xxx. Dexter for xxxx.Artist and Scientists who have inspired me. Peter BlasserWolfgang, my dear friend, who is longer with us for his friendship, support, and talks. 
ContentsAbstract	vAcknowledgments	viiContents	ixList of Figures	xiiiList of Tables	1Chapter 1	Introduction	41.1	Thesis Overview & Outline	4Chapter 2	Background	72.1	Leonardo DaVinci - The Artist Scientist	72.2	Nicola Tesla’s Coils – Visualizing Electricity	92.3	Luigi Russolo	102.4	Louis and Bebe Barron – Intiontal Instability	102.5	Circuit Benders & Hardware Hackers - Subversion, Injection, and Appropriation	122.5.1	Reed Ghalzala – Circuit Bending	132.5.2	Nicholas Collins – Hardware Hacking	142.6	Zimoun	142.7	Christina Kubisch - Eavesdropping on Electromagnetic Systems	152.8	Peter Blasser - Embracing the Indeterminate	182.8.1	Paper Circuits	192.9	Evelina Domnitch and Dmitry Gelfand – Artists as Catalysts for Scientific Innovation	202.10	The Machine Lab at CalArts	202.11	Philosophy for Hardware Development	222.12	Artistic Constraints	23Chapter 3	Human Circuit Interaction in the Gallery	253.1	Introduction	263.2	Single Interaction and the Interaction Rail	273.2.1	Electrical Box : Installation Description	273.2.2	Spacial Semiotics	283.2.3	Guiding Interaction on a Rail	303.3	Open Interaction	373.3.1	Cathode Ray Tubes : Installation Description	383.3.2	Any-To-Any Interaction	383.4	Anti-Interactivity	383.4.1	No Humans Allowed : Installation Description	383.5	External Interaction	393.5.1	Digital Rain : Installation Description	403.6	Non-Interactive	413.6.1	Computer Music : Installation Description	413.7	Conclusion	43Chapter 4	Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCI	444.1	Introduction	444.2	Abstractive/Deconstruction	464.2.1	Discovery Synth : Project Overview	464.2.2	Abstracting Buttons	474.2.3	Deconstructing and Abstracting Potentiometers	484.3	Circuit Exposure for Direct HCI	504.3.1	Repackaging and Re-appropiation	524.3.2	Approach to Interaction	524.4	Re-Appropriation of Conventions	524.4.1	Modular SNES : Project Description	524.5	Deception	534.5.1	Symbiotic SNES : Project Description	534.6	Orchestrating Circuitry (One-To-Many)	544.6.1	Approach to Interaction	54Chapter 5	Approaches to Mechatronic Performances	565.1	Humans Leading Intelligent Mechatronic Instrumentalists	565.1.1	Robot Whispers - Performance Description	565.1.2	I’m Hungry – Performance Description	575.2	Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Humans	575.2.1	Beatles	575.2.2	Hello Humans	575.3	Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves	575.3.1	Computer Music – As a Performance	575.3.2	Antisocial – As a Performnace	585.4	Mechatronic Personalities	585.4.1	No Humans Allowed – As a Performance	585.5	Conclusion	58Chapter 6	Conclusion	596.1	Summary	596.2	Primary Contributions	596.3	Final Thoughts	60Chapter 7	Appendix	617.1	Pantheon Mechatronic System	617.1.1	Server	617.1.2	Shields	627.2	Project Backgrounds	647.2.1	Retronos – Virtue of Expirimentation	647.3	Technical Notes	647.3.1	Electrical Box - Radio Receivers	647.3.2	Electrical Box - EavesDroppers	657.3.3	Modular SNES – Technical Details	697.3.4	Discovery Synth – Technical Details	707.3.5	Symbiotic SNES - Technical Details	707.3.6	Voltage Slammer - Technical Details	717.4	Secondary Themes	727.4.1	Electrical Box - Complication of Radio Interaction	73Bibliography	76
List of FiguresFigure 1: Leonardo DaVinci – Self-portrait, chalk, 1512 on left:	7Figure 2: Tesla Coil	9Figure 3: Bebe and Louis Barron in 1956	10Figure 4: Barron Circuit	11Figure 5: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.	14Figure 6: Map from Christina Kubisch’s Milano Electrical Walk in 2009	17Figure 7: Peter Blasser paper circuit with paper dissolved.	18Figure 8: Old. Mr. Grassi designed by Peter Blasser and built by the author	19Figure 9: Peter Blasser - Tocante Solar Powered Synthesizer	20Figure 10: Machine Lab @ CalArts: home to the MTIID department and the Digital Arts Minor (TOD): more resent picture	20Figure 11: Learning as the difference between a projects complexity and your distance from the tech.	22Figure 12: Graphs of Interaction Graphs	25Figure 13: Eavesdropper from outside	29Figure 14: EB Interaction Rail	30Figure 15: Signage for Electrical Box (TODO, combine with picture of door from far away)	32Figure 16: EB grid configuration.	33Figure 17: One of two Listening Stations	35Figure 18: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo	40Figure 19: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo	41Figure 20: Discovery Synth	46Figure 21: Approach to removing physical abstractions for Discovery Synth’s buttons and pots	47Figure 22: Resistive Materials research for the Discovery Synth sliders	48Figure 23: Discovery Synth as one controller for the Yin~Yang interactive installation in 2015.	49Figure 24: Second version of the Retrono Synthesizers	50Figure 25: The Voltage Slammer	54Figure 26: EavesDroppers Circuit Diagram	66Figure 27: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronics	67Figure 28: Telex 520 Headphones used in Electrical Box	68Figure 29: Modular SNES, first of three designs.	69Figure 30: Transduction and Gain steps in signal flow for installation	73
List of TablesTable 1: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities	40Chapter 1 Introductionintro had four sections:intro - 4 paragrapshs, funner down to thesis statement.-motivation - perosnal and in the firld.-define overviewthen outline (with the singular picture as well)1.1 Thesis Overview & OutlineThe application of Spacial Semiotics to facilitate electronic interaction is the focus of Electrical Box (Chapter 3). Xxxxxxxxxxx. Chapter 4 presents 6 different interfaces that have been built to either simplify, complicate or question our interaction modalities with electronic systems. 
Chapter 2 BackgroundThis chapter provides a history of artists, scientists and ideas that were essential to the genesis of my research as an artist.2.1 Leonardo DaVinci - The Artist ScientistFigure 1: Leonardo DaVinci – Self-portrait, chalk, 1512 on left:Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci was an Italian painter, inventor, engineer, writer, astronomer, matahmatician, sculpture, and overall renisaince badass. He is known as the father of paleontology, ichnology, and architecture. He lived from April 15 , 1452 to May 2, 1519 and more than any other historical figure epitomized the idea aof the renaissance humanist artist-scientist.(“Leonardo Da Vinci | Italian Artist, Engineer, and Scientist | Britannica.com”) The ultimate renaissance man: the artist scientist.Point out connection between inter-discipline practice and innovation.Point out we are in a time of accelerated renesaince and it is vitally important to adopt a modern version of the renissains man.saper vedere – “knowing how to see” : Leonardo believed that ones eyes were the main avenue to knowledge. 2.2 Nicola Tesla’s Coils – Visualizing ElectricityFigure 2: Tesla CoilYou ask someone to close their eyes and to envision [TODO, do study on this] electricity, they most likely will think of lightning or of a Taser spark, perhaps if they are a biggest enough nerd they will think of a tesla coil.	Tesla coils do not really serve much of a practical purpose in the modern world. But it is safe to say that more tesla coils are being made today that any other time in history.  It shows us, visually and acoustically, the power that we as a race have over the laws of the universe, over nature. The tesla coil is of interest to be because it was one of the first, and to this day perhaps the most effective, displays of electrical energy. [TODO research this] The Tesla coil showcased the awesome might and natural force of electrical energy. It was tangible, terrifying and grand.2.3 Luigi RussoloLuigi Russolo, in 1913 wrote The Art of Noises a futurist manifesto that waws published three years later. 2.4 Louis and Bebe Barron – Intiontal InstabilityFigure 3: Bebe and Louis Barron in 1956Bebe Barron and her husband Louis Barron are best known for their sound design and scoring for the film Forbidden Planet which was the first major motion picture to film an electronic soundtrack (DESCRIBE BETTER TODO). In 1956 there was no (TODO, confim this is true) synthesizer your could grab from the Guitar Center in town, and if you wanted to experiment with the creation of synthesized sounds, your only viable method is to build the circuity yourself. Figure 4: Barron Circuit      Louis build circuits with the intention of them being unstable and figuratively and literally blowing up after a short period of time. They recorded the sounds that these circuits made, catalogued them and then appropriated them using the technology they had available to them. Innovation through experimentation, pushing the limits, breaking things, and putting them back together in a different form. They have the same spirit of electronic experimentation and interaction that I want my installations to invoke.	They read the book cybernetics and were inspired by electronics and circuit design. As amateur electronic tinkers and the proud owners of one of the very few electro-acoustic music studios the Barron’s operated in a different stratosphere than the other electro-acoustic music studios of the time. Xxxx, xxxx and xxxx were all housed in academic institutions while xxx, xxxx and xxx were supported by their relative countries governments. Likewise, there were communication networks between many of these studios. The Barron’s were, not really academics (I think) and I argue that that detachment allowed them the freedom to be innovative in manners that would have much more difficult for the other studios (especially the government funded institutions). 	In the beginning of their experiences with building sound making circuits they generally would start with a circuit that was ‘stable’ and oscillated in a somewhat predictable manner. After some time experimenting that began to realize that the most interesting sounds to them came right before these circuits were overloaded and exploded. They began to even design circuits with the intention of them being somewhat unpredictable and unstable with the intention of them exploding. This is one of the explanations of their style of music which usually consists of many smaller recordings being spliced together. Most of these sounds were figuratively the death of a circuit.	The spirit of “I sort of know what is going on, let me try this thing that might break everything” had lead me to stumble upon the happy accidents that become my installations.       By 1951 John Cage became interested in the work that Bebe and Louis were doing in their ‘home’ studio. (their initial work began in 1948 after their wedding with tape reversal and splicing. (Hinkle-Turner)2.5 Circuit Benders & Hardware Hackers - Subversion, Injection, and AppropriationThe circuit bending and hardware hacking communities are of interest to me primarily because of their approach to electronic devices as well as electricity itself. Circuit Bending and Hardware Hacking are both strange, anti-social, punk anarchistic pastimes. Circuit benders, especially, often are amateurs that don’t know much about electronics or electricity in general. Yes, they might have a Swiss cheese internet knowledge that is very specific to, let’s say, a see and say but that might not even know about Kirchhoff’s laws or how to go about simple node-based circuit analysis.	They learn enough to not hurt themselves (hopefully) and to have fun and they void the warranty of their electronic keyboard and kill an afternoon crafting a peculiar artifact that is likely to continue getting ignored and unloved and eventually thrown out. (perhaps this speaks too specifically to my own personal experience). Usually people who embark of the craft of circuit bending do so more for the process and the artifact that is the result than the practical use of the finished object. Yes, I have met some composers, produces and the like who are interested in circuit bent toys, but now with the advent of downloadable sample packs that you can use with any sampler found in Ableton, Logic, Cubase and other DAWS not nearly as many people commit to building the ‘instruments’ themselves.2.5.1 Reed Ghalzala – Circuit BendingMr. Ghalzala is often referred to as the ‘father’ of circuit bending, although I believe that perhaps a more befitting title is the first face of circuit bending. Nothing against Reed, but, to his own admittance his stumbled upon circuit bending in a manner that can only be described as naively coincidental. He experienced an event that thousands of people have experienced before but just so happened to be just the right kind of nerd to explore the reason why. He was an explorer in his own right (and I guess still is, he lives in the woods only returning back to civilization on a consistent basis to buy more batteries and food.)	He set the tone for the movement, he was no scientist, he did not do well in school and to be honest does not produce the most interesting circuit bent devices, he was a hippy, a rebel. The idea that it is okay to break something, the idea that you can start a project without knowing what you will end up doing or create is very appealing to be. The idea that you can start doing something that you don’t know anything about and can figure it out as you go is really empowering and my main take away from the circuit bending movement.  (Ghazala)2.5.2 Nicholas Collins – Hardware HackingFigure 5: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.The fact that I only did one project out of Nicolas Collins book and never even finished is a testament to how it changed my life. It is what I tell student artists to go out and buy when they come to me for tutoring in electronics because I never finished it. I tried, several times, it’s just too good.	Let me explain. It was such an inspiration for me that whenever I browsed through it I Coming from the academic world Nicholas approached things somewhat differently than Reed. [TODO insert background on Nicholas Collins]. With his feet firmly set in the academic world Collins brings a certain integrity to the field of hardware hacking and circuit bending. 2.6 ZimounZimoun does nothing to obscure the mechanism from the viewer. By repetition of the same seemingly simple mechanical device he brings light to the devices complexity.2.7 Christina Kubisch - Eavesdropping on Electromagnetic SystemsThere is nothing I can think of about the work of the Berlin based artist Christina Kubisch (b. 1948) that does not appeal to me. It contains all of the elements that constitute fascinating and wondrous sound art. It creates an intimate experience that can be grand and shared by many people at the same time. It has technology at its core (somewhat mysterious technology at that) but it does not shove the technology into your face. At the same time the technology is necessary to tell the narrative and impart the experience it is attempting to enforce.       A truly multidiscipline artist, Christina studied electronic music at the Milan Conservatory of music but was unsatisfied with how ‘conventional’ her classes were and what she was required to learn. She decided to enroll in the Technical University in Milan and began to take classes in electronics. As described in an interview for cabinet magazine Christina describes how she stumbled upon, what has become her magnum opus. “One day I bought a telephone amplifier, a little cube that you could put next to your telephone so that you could hear it without having the receiver in your hand. The cube was switched on, and when I came into the laboratory, it started to make really strange sounds in my handbag. I took it out and asked my professor what was going on. He explained to me that there were coils in this little cube, and that they picked up some of the machines in the room. It was like a flash in my mind. It was exactly at the time when I wanted to get away from performance and start producing installations.”      She goes on to explain how her excitement over the technology commanded her installation configurations.“In my early installations, there were people wandering around with these little cubes in their hands, walking along thick electrical cables that had sounds running through them. I didn’t think about using the sounds of the outside world. I had no idea about electricity in general or that it could make interesting sounds. I just used the system of electromagnetic induction as a way of amplifying musical sounds.”      After five years she started working with an Italian headphone manufacturing company and commissioned 20 custom headphones with her electromagnetic snooping technology installed inside of the ear thingies (TODO). She made several installations showcasing the custom headphones but eventually the set got destroyed/stolen and she shelved the project. Almost a decade later she found a sponsor that would her help to develop the technology and create a new/better system, in 1999 at the Potsdamer Platz in Berlin she used the new system in a large installation ”Forty Pillars and One Room” in a large parking garage. She wrapped lengths of cables covered in green phosphorescent paint around forty of the free standing pillars in the parking garage (TODO FINISH DESCRIBING). (Net)	What is interesting about Forty Pillars and One Room is her use of electricity and concrete to create a world of nature. The sounds she chose to pipe through the cables created a sonic landscape in direct juxtaposition to the electrical and industrial materials she used for construction.      She began to incorporate electromagnetic induction in her sound installations in the late 1970’s as she began investigating EM fields and electronics. and finished developing a system for leveraging magnetic fields for acoustic transmission in 1980. But she did not study electronics or electrical systems in the university days. Instead she took night workshops [TODO: Add in the specific workshop] on electronics because she was drawn to it. She wanted to incorporate electronics into her work and sought out the knowledge she needed to then create the art that appealed to her.  (“CABINET // Invisible Cities: An Interview with Christina Kubisch”)2.7.1.1 Christina Kubisch’s Electrical WalksFigure 6: Map from Christina Kubisch’s Milano Electrical Walk in 2009In 2004, Kubisch officially began exhibiting works under the umbrella name of Electrical Walks. Her Electrical Walks, although closely related to her previous installations, featured different source material. Instead of planting electromagnetic signals in wiring that people were tasked with listening to via her devices, she decided to allow the environment to create the fields for her. When researching for a new walk, she embarks into an urban center with an EM listening device. She walks around the city and maps the magnetic activity. She constructs EM1 maps after thoroughly exploring all of the surrounding areas. The maps show areas of sonic interest and suggest routes to tour the cities magnetic features. Copies are made and handed out to the public along with her custom built magnetic field listeners.      Christina used the term ‘electrical walk’ to describe the action of exploring a space’s EM properties by means of EM listening just as one might go on a nature walk. For her, the Electrical Walks are not only for other people to enjoy, but are also an activity she enjoys to do. In fact, she has done Electrical Walks in different cities that have not been opened to the public: they were only experienced by her.  2.8 Peter Blasser - Embracing the IndeterminateFigure 7: Peter Blasser paper circuit with paper dissolved.In a world dominated by rigid rules and equations it is refreshing to enter into Peters unique take on circuit design with his paper circuits and point to point soldering. His guide-traces curve and arch around the circuit creating a rats-nest of connections, and possible bridges. About a third of the components values are left to the discretion of the builder and you quickly run into Peters quirky terminology (harry caps, X resistors, etc.). Although it might seem crude and amateurish at the first glance, the instrument is really well designed. It boasts stereo output and an amazing range of possible acoustic manipulation via its inset speakers and resonate properties and, perhaps most importantly, plenty of character. The random components ensure that each birthing of the Old Mr. Grasser sounds different.2.8.1 Paper CircuitsFigure 8: Old. Mr. Grassi designed by Peter Blasser and built by the author      I had the pleasure of meeting Peter Blasser at a workshop I attended at CalArts in 2015. Talking to him about his approach to circuit design and building the Old Mr. Grassi synthesizer with him was very influential in my design and approach to the Discovery and Retrono Synthesizers I built later that year.	Clay Chaplin, the director of the Experimental Sound Practices department at CalArts invited me to the workshop along with about a dozen other students. We met in-between classes in and unofficial manner and going into the first day of the workshop I knew nothing of Peters work and really what I was getting myself into. I simply knew we were going to build some sort of a synthesizer.	Peters circuits were astable, unpredictable and were full of nothing but character. His electronic diagrams all hand drawn and also function as the breadboard, perfboard and circuit board. He uses his own set of symbols (harry caps) and often times specific values are not specified and instead a suggested range is given for a component. 	The ideas and approaches of Peter Blasser allowed me to apply circuit bending techniques and approaches to circuit intersection into premeditated projects. It allowed me to justify the bridging of those two worlds.Becoming one with the InstrumentFigure 9: Peter Blasser - Tocante Solar Powered Synthesizer2.9 Evelina Domnitch and Dmitry Gelfand – Artists as Catalysts for Scientific Innovation2.10 The Machine Lab at CalArtsFigure 10: Machine Lab @ CalArts: home to the MTIID department and the Digital Arts Minor (TOD): more resent pictureThe CalArts machine lab is the hub of the MTIID department as well as the digital arts minor at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia California. Besides being the technological hub for the institute the Machine lab is home to the Machine Orchestra and the 10 mechatronic instruments the Orchestra consists of.       Over the summer of 2016 I was hired by the MTIID faculty at the California Institute of the Arts to repair and reassemble/integrate nearly a half dozen or so mechatronic personalities that resided in the Machine Lab. I had no idea what condition the instruments were in and what my time would be spent doing. I had hopes of getting everything working perfectly and maintaining the integrity of the department. 	I spent the first few weeks cleaning the machines, polishing, and tightening. I took careful note as to how they were assembled and what their capabilities were. Eventually I was tasked to prioritize my efforts to working on two specific robots. Lydia and JackBox. Timpin had his hand in the creation of both of these machines. JackBox was created for the Kronoz Quartet, was unable to find a home and ended up staying on loan to the MTIID department. JackBox had been sitting in the front of the Machine Lab for as long as I have been at CalArts and I was under the impression that it no longer worked. Lydia, was once glorious, but the 2016 spring semester and Digital Arts Expo had taken its toll on the once proud centerpiece of the Machine Lab. 2.11 Philosophy for Hardware DevelopmentFigure 11: Learning as the difference between a projects complexity and your distance from the tech.Over my time as an artist, I have refined an approach for developing my installations.  First I begin a research phase where the goal is to learn as much about the technology required for my project as possible.  This begins with a few weeks digging deep into the topic; intellectually, by reading about the technology, as well as physically, by building prototypes and conducting experiments.  I approach the mechanisms from the lowest level and work upwards.  For instance, when learning how to design and manufacture printed circuit boards, I spent many months experimenting with etching my own copper clad utilizing various DIY2 and hobbyist approaches before I learned proper circuit design using EAGLE CAD and PCB3 fabrication houses.  When the low level experimental prototypes fail and I understand the reasons why; I take a step back and see if there is anything I can do to simplify my technical approach.  I repeat the process over and over again until I am confident in my chosen approach: completing the research phase. Next I begin the development process.  Incorporating aesthetics, I start developing a production design that both functions as I intended and looks good.      All of my works are explorations in one or two concepts. The concepts can take the form of a specific technology, an emotional state, a chord progression, the use of a specific tool, etc. Electrical Box for me was primarily an exploration in guiding gallery interaction.      The initial EavesDropper designs were not as streamlined as the final versions. When I began working on the project, I built and designed as much of the circuitry ‘from scratch’ as possible. In the case of the guitar pickup, for instance, I experimented with different size inductor coils instead of the pickups. Likewise, I tested many amplification configurations, including op-amps, transistors, as well as various breakout boards and even guitar amplifiers. With each iteration the problem was approached from a different angle. After a few successful versions of the technology was built and I was able to develop an understanding of the concepts behind the circuitry, I finally started drafting my production model. The early exploratory designs proved vitally important. They allowed me to better understand the underlying electronic mechanisms and helped to streamline the final design.2.12 Artistic ConstraintsMy work addresses our relationship with electronics and electricity, a commonality throughout my work as an installation artist. Our societal and personal relationships with electricity are complex, strange, ever changing and a constant source of inspiration for me. In 2016 we are very removed from electricity and circuitry in its raw ‘natural’ form. In our daily lives, we generally press a button or interact with another form of abstraction that then operates on the circuitry that is always hidden from view. It is rare that we find ourselves in a situation where we are directly interacting with circuitry or electricity. This has been the case since the introduction of electrical systems. This is with good reason; electrical energy has the capacity to harm us physically.  Since the War of the Currents starting in the late 1890’s between Tesla and Edison, where public electrocutions of animals and pets were performed in the streets, electricity has been associated with danger and death to a large portion of the population (“The War of the Currents”).       We are, obviously, concerned with the result of electronic work instead of the electricity itself in nearly all cases. For example, the computer I am typing my thesis on right now, which uses electrical energy to conduct its computations, is more useful than the electrical arcs bursting out of a Tesla Coil: even though the Coil consumes orders of magnitude more electricity than my laptop.  To give another example, the lightbulb that is hanging above me right now is functional as a result of the light produced by the electrical work done on the filament: the electricity itself is not directly providing us with light, instead, the light is a byproduct of heat produced by current flowing inside the bulb.      As an installation artist, I am both interested in complicating as well as simplifying our most common electronic interaction modalities. The majority of my installations and research prior to EB explored simplifying our relationship with electricity by removing abstractions and presenting more direct interaction with circuitry. Electrical Box, instead, complicates our relationship with the radio by inserting additional steps into the signal chain, forcing us to navigate additional abstraction layers.The following list of constraints I have applied to my work as an installation artist.1. Never tell the visitor what to do.2. The work must complicate or simplify an electro-magnetic system to bring light the the systems inheriant properties.3. The work never explains itself, but leaves itself open to the search for interpretation. 
Chapter 3 Human Circuit Interaction in the GalleryFigure 12: Graphs of Interaction Graphs3.1 IntroductionIn this chapter, three of the authors interactive EM installations are presented as examples of approaches to guiding human-circuit interaction in the gallery. First, Electrical Box is presented as an example [NV3]of guiding a viewer through a single interaction rail through the use of symiotics. Next, Cathode Ray Tubes is used as an example of creating a interaction modality that is simple, open, flexible and branching. Lastly, No Humans Allowed is presented as an example of ‘anti-interaction’; a gallery that is oppressive, hostile and redirective to the presence of humans.InstallationStanceInteraction ModalityApproachElectrical BoxNeutralNeutralObservationCathode Ray TubesHuman-CentricSubversive AugmentationSimplificationNo Humans AllowedCircuit-CentricAggressive, HostileObservation from AfarComputer MusicNeutral (with human-centric and circuit-centric components)3.2 Single Interaction and the Interaction RailFigure: Electrical Box - WaveCave Gallery September 9th-19th 2016   This section presents Electrical Box as an example of an installation that exhibits a HCIM of neutral observation. The RF receiver system is not measurably effected by the presence of humans and the system does not directly interfere with our human facilities. There is enough light in the space to see and enough empty space to walk without having to touch the electronics. Even when using the EavesDroppers the interaction that Humans have with the electrical system is one of eaves dropping. The system continues to go on running unaffected by the viewers observations. 3.2.1 Electrical Box : Installation DescriptionElectrical Box first presents you with a silent room ordained with over 1000’ of instrument cables hanging from the rigging grid. Small, white light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) flicker at the ends of the cables suspended in air. After your eyes adjust to the space, you notice several pairs of headphones hanging on the walls in the far corners of the gallery. You push cables out of your way as you walk through the exhibit to a pair of headphones. Now at the far end of the gallery, you see that the headphones are plugged into the sides of round metal tins resting on clear glass corner shelves. You put on the headphones and pick up one of the attached metal tins but only hear faint static, so you decide to investigate one of the particularly bright LEDs in the middle of the space. Walking back into the hanging cables you hear music in your headphones. You stop and hold the metal tin up to one of the suspended cables and the music gets louder. You realize that the sound is being emitted from the cables themselves, empowered with your new knowledge you sonically explore the exhibit by holding the tin to different cables; tuning into different radio stations. After some time, you take your headphones off, place them back where you found them and walk back though the again silent space before leaving the gallery.3.2.2 Spacial SemioticsTo avoid violating my first principle of interactive EM installations, EB leaned heavily on the use of spacial semiotics to subconsciously guide the visitor through the interaction rail. This section discussed several techniques       Ernest Edmonds, Professor of Computation and Creative Media at the University of Technology in Sydney, noted “art becomes interactive when audience participation is an integral part of the artwork. In making interactive art, the artist goes beyond considerations of how the work will look or sound to an observer. The way that it interacts with the audience is also a crucial part of its essence.”(TODO, from measons thesis, but find real source).Spacial Semiotics is xxxxxxxxx. Artists have been interested in Spacial Semiotics for quite some time. Give examples of artists who talked/wrote about this. 3.2.2.1 No ControlFigure 13: Eavesdropper from outsideI had the option of adding various types of user control to the EavesDroppers. For instance, it would have been easy to incorporate a potentiometer or rotary knob into the design that gave the participant agency over the devices gain or pitch but I decided against creating any of those modalities. I wanted them to be magical black boxes4: I did not necessarily want people to know the technical mechanisms inside the shiny tin enclosures.       As soon as someone is given a degree of control over an object, a relational shift occurs: no longer do the two exhibit a neutral relationship. (TODO add annotation) Once the person is granted agency over the object, a dominant relationship emerges. The object become subservient to the user: the object is controlled by its user. This destroys the sensation of wonder; we now control the device, have power over it and it is no longer as magical, operating beyond our control and understanding. To avoid giving the interactee any mechanism for controlling the EavesDropper circuitry, I designed the devices to have a fixed gain set by a static resistor: the only way to turn them off is to unscrew the top, and unplug the battery.      The absence of user control over the EavesDroppers also helps guide participants to pick up the devices and walk around the gallery (step five in the rail). I feared that someone would misread the interaction element of the installation as the fiddling with dials and knobs on the EavesDroppers, instead of using the EavesDroppers for their intended purpose. The lack of an interface had the added benefit of removing any frustration related to learning/adjusting a set of parameters, while also greatly reducing the number of things that can be broken or damaged. Ideally, the EavesDropper functions as an extension of the body; a task easier to achieve with a simple, intuitive interface.      3.2.3 Guiding Interaction on a RailFigure 14: EB Interaction RailWHAT IS INTERACTION RAIL? –Electrical Box, and its interaction goals are directly contrary to the typical role of the gallery goer. In the MOMA5 or in the LACMA6 there is a general understanding that one does not touch, breath on, or linger with any of the pieces. After all, everything in the room must be preserved. It has all been meticulously angled, positioned, and lighted according to the curator’s expert opinions.        Unlike my other installations that address guided interaction, EB exhibits a linear interaction schema. There is a singular interaction rail7 that I am attempting to guide viewers though. People can deviate from the rail, but if they are unable to skip a step and if they do not follow the rail to the end, they miss a significant aspect of the installation. Thus, when conceptualizing Electrical Box, considerable effort had to be made to construct situations that did not directly tell people what to do, but instead guided them down the rail. 3.2.3.1 First ExposureThere are three different ways that people were first exposed to Electrical Box. 1. Walk-in: They walked by the gallery space and noticed that the doors were covered with black construction paper and that there was a piece of paper hanging next to the doors.2. E-mail: They saw the blurb in the daily announcement that the Herb Albert School of Music emails to all students each morning at 9:003. Word of Mouth: They heard about the installation by word of mouth.I did not want the first exposure to the installation to be an explanation of the gallery space or any sort of hint to what form the interaction takes. Instead, both the email announcement as well as the sign read simply and was a single sentence long. The important points were: 1. The installation is in the WaveCave gallery.2. The installation is interactive.3. The installation involves electromagnetism.In the case of the sign outside of the gallery itself, there was no need to mention the location so it simply read “an interactive electro-magnetic installation by Nathan Villicaña-Shaw”. 3.2.3.2 SignageFigure 15: Signage for Electrical Box (TODO, combine with picture of door from far away)In many ways, I approached signage for Electrical Box as clues to a mystery. The installation ran under the radar so to speak. I only provided the announcements and signs as minimally required by CalArts convention and did little to advertise the installation. The simple sign outside of the gallery is shown above. If read, the visitor will only know that the name of the installation is Electrical Box, the name of the artist is Nathan Villicaña-Shaw, the installation is electromagnetic in nature and it is interactive.3.2.3.3 Creating SpaceEB consists of over 1000’ feet of cable, 16 LED’s, and four electromagnetic listening devices. However, the WaveCave is quite a large space8 and once all of the equipment was loaded into the gallery I knew I would be unable to completely saturate the space with cables as I had initially envisioned: I simply did not have enough cables. If I attempted to fill each square foot of the gallery with what I had, the space would have felt bare as there would have been a great deal of space in-between each cable run. I wanted the installation to have the experience of being completely surrounded by cables in almost a claustrophobic sense. My only option was to revision the installation as having negative space in addition to occupied space.        Figure 16: EB grid configuration.      Ironically, in order to fill the gallery, I needed to create and organize empty space. I went about accomplishing this in two manners. The first was to spatially frame the installation by leaving the entire outside rows and columns of the grid void of cables (see figure 16). This changed the installation quite significantly, as the entire exhibit was no longer occupied by cables, but instead, the cables were framed in the gallery by empty space physically surrounding them. The frame functioned as a walkway around the installation; you were able to walk around the cables and were no longer forced to navigate through them. While at first I was distressed about this change in the spacial dynamics, the framing of the space ended up helping guide people though the interaction rail by softening the transition into the gallery and by allowing intermediate commitment to the interaction.        While the border helped the installation feel fuller, it also reduced the area cables had to cover by 20%, from 90 to 72 drops. An obstacle in the rigging grid was the six florescent lights that were built into the ceiling. These subsections were completely consumed by lights housing  leaving no option to route the cable through these sections the same way as everywhere else9. While it was possible to weave the cabling in and out of the grid in adjacent subsections, giving the appearance that the subsection was routed the same as the others, I ultimately decided on leaving the squares absent of the cables. As these spots were specifically picked by the rooms designers, or electricians, to provide even lighting throughout the room, each of the six lights were in the relative center of the room. When left void of cables, they provided perfect vantage points from within the installation making it easy to stand inside of the cabling without the cables actually touching your body.3.2.3.4 Creating Electrical SpaceWhen you refuse to directly tell people what to do, you run the risk of them diverging from your intended experience (the rail) at any moment. For example, in EB, it is essential that once someone listens to their first cable that they listen to another cable and begin to explore the space (step 5 in figure 14). The signals that reside in each drop thus needed to be arranged in a pattern that ensures as much variety in adjacent drops as possible. If two or more cables next to each other are carrying the same signal it is possible someone will only listen to those cables and assume every cable ‘contains’ the same signal. Each cable consisted of between 2 and 4 loops as well as the terminating LED, for a total of between 3 and 5 drops from the grid. Each radios output was being sent through two cables. If two of the longer cables are connected to the same radio, the same signal could be sent through up to 10 loops/terminals. If all ten of these drop points were found next to one of the corners housing an EavesDropper station, a visitor would most likely listen to the first two or three cables, hear the same station, and conclude that all cables contain the same station: never completing the rail, getting stuck on step 4. Figure 17: One of two Listening Stations3.2.3.5 Light"A painter should begin every canvas with a wash of black, because all things in nature are dark except where exposed by the light."  -- Leonardo da Vinci“I will love the light for it shows me the way, yet I will endure the darkness for it shows me the stars.” -- Og MandinoFrom the beginning, I knew I wanted the installation space to be dimly lit, a blank canvas. There is a certain intimacy about the darkness. Like the flickering of the fireplace in the cave 10,000 years ago, there is something comforting about a dimly lit space: it allows us to let our guard down. Absolute, complete darkness, on the other hand, is unnerving in its own right. When I was a teenager my parents would take me spelunking10. When you are hundreds of feet underground the earth in a cave and you turn off your lights, the darkness is no longer a novelty: it resembles the feeling one gets while holding their breath underwater and thinking about downing. In EB light is approached as Mandino foreshadows, as a tool to show people the way, to guide viewers along the rail.3.2.3.6 LEDsThe LED’s that light the gallery function as level indicators for the output of eight radios hidden in the galleries rigging grid. Meant to be the primary visual draw, the LED’s were simple 5mm white through-hole LED’s bought in bulk. They were coated in plastic dip along with the ‘phantom-load’ resistor three times (allowed to dry in-between). I then carefully cut the plastic coating off of the lens of the LED’s leaving the leads, resistors and cable tips covered in the plastic coating. In application, the brightness of the LED’s did not exhibit much variety and the average luminance was the result of the reception quality for the particular station and the stations overall loudness (e.g. music is brighter than talking). What did vary was whether or not the LED was on or not. It takes a great deal of gain to drive an LED off of the signal that should be driving a speaker.	Seven LEDs were concentrated in the rear of the installation space: each grid segment in the back row had its own LED. This row of LED’s were vertically arranged in a V formation so that the light in the center of the room was closest to the floor while the LED’s on the ends were closest to the ceiling. The remaining nine LED’s were distributed in an even manner in the front 7 rows, leaving a single row buffer between the formation in the rear and the random scattering in the foreground. This created a focal point in the rear of the room that encouraged folks to enter into the space: it gave importance to the rear of the room. As the EavesDroppers were in the back of the room and were an essential component to interacting with the space, I wanted to immediately draw their attention to that area. Although they looked beautiful and provided visual ambiance for the piece, the primary function of the LEDs is to be guides to the visitors: they helped folks stay on the rail. 3.2.3.7 Door LightThere were two forms of light originating from the WaveCave doors that proved impactful to the installation: frame leakage and open door. Frame leaking, from in-between, under and above the entrance doors, was unfortunately unavoidable due to the construction of the doors themselves. Each of the two French doors are single pieces of ¼” glass; with at least a ¼” gap on all four sides to ensure that they do not come into contact with any other surface: I could stick a pinky finger between the two doors. (see figure xxxx) I covered the doors with black construction paper to prevent the outside light from shining through, but was unable to prevent the leakage that framed the doors themselves. With no real way to completely eliminate the boarder leakage, I looked for ways I could leverage it; I decided to add ‘peep’ holes on the doors. 	The second source of door light was far more impactful to the user experience. When the doors are opened they flood the gallery with outlide lumanescance. The large glass doors also take a very long time to close. (TODO: measure how long. All of this was very beneficial to the individual that enters into the gallery space but ended up being quite disruptive to gallery viewers already interacting with the space. 3.2.3.8 Overhead LampsAfter I finished setting up the installation I soon realized that the EavesDroppers were obscured by darkness and the hundreds of feet of instrument cables in the room. They were not readily apparent and ran the risk of not being noticed. After your eyes adjusted to the dim lighting of the space you are naturally drawn to the flickering LEDs and the hanging cables. There were adjustable spotlights in the gallery, but they immediately dominated the space when turned on as they were far too bright. I improvised with two clip on lamps I had lying around along with some low wattage energy saving bulbs. I created 8” tubes out of the black construction paper that I used to block out the door and some gaff tape to make my own dim spotlights. After some meticulous positioning in the grid, I was able to get my makeshift spotlights shinning down on the corners providing just the right amount of illumination after adjusting the length of the tube.3.3 Open InteractionCathode Ray Tubes is used as an example of presenting a broad electrical system with many different optional interaction modalities. 3.3.1 Cathode Ray Tubes : Installation Description3.3.2 Any-To-Any Interaction3.4 Anti-InteractivityIf the definetition of an installation that is interactive is one that is only relizable with the agency of a visitor: I propose that an anti-interactive installation is an installation that when observed by a visitor looses its facilities and ceases to function. NHA’s mechatronic personalities do everything in their power to get people to leave and attempt to create an uncomfortable, unnerving hostile environment. No Humans Allowed (NHA) is an example of a circuit-centric interaction architecture. NHA’s mechatronic personalities react with aggression or silence with the presence of a human. In the sence that the installation is in its most active state when no-one is present to observe the system I am presenting NHA as an anti-interactive installation.3.4.1 No Humans Allowed : Installation Description	No Humans Allowed creates a community of mechatronic personalities that reside in the “gated” WaveCave community. The personalities are xenophobic: reacting to outsiders via paralysis or violence. When the presence of a human is detected, the community breaks down and no longer functions harmoniously. The result is a hostile space that outsiders are not able to enter without being either attacked or shunned by the society residing within. Each of the six mechatronic sound sculptures (personalities) are constructed from extruded aluminum, acrylic, ultrasonic rangefinders, solenoids, DC motors and LED’s. The personalities are either hanging from the grid or resting on the floor depending on their size and construction. The ultrasonic rangefinders allow each personality to detect the presence of gallery viewers who will affect their behavior. When no outside presence is detected, all members of the community are alive, active, and productive. The presence of a human or ‘other’ disrupts the community. If the outsider gets too close to any specific sculpture, the personality will either become paralyzed by hate and fear (turn off) or will attempt to “violently” deter the intruder (loud, abrupt, a-rhythmic noises). Either way, the personality will be so preoccupied by the presence of the ‘other’ it will no longer contribute to the community as a whole, disrupting the harmony of society. No Humans Allowed hopes to shine light on the danger of xenophobic ‘other’ thinking that is becoming more and more common in the UK with Brexit and the United States with the election of Trump. With the rise of mechatronics, robots, AI the question of AI morality is becoming a topic of discussion in more and more circles. Do we want our robotic children to exhibit violent, isolationist, bigoted tendencies or do we want them to be accepting, loving and caring to all other forms of live and intelligence?      Three of the robotic personalities are standing sculpture constructed out of 80/20 extruded aluminum beams, three different banks of 6 solenoids and four stepper motors. The other three personalities are motor mobiles : the top is two pieces of clear acrylic cut in a circle., there is  an Arduino onboard that controls 6 5V 3200rpm DC motors that each have a white LED soldered between its two leads. The gallery consists of three pair of personalities with each pair containing one mobile and one standing sculpture. When no ‘other’ is detected in the proximity of the sculptures the standing and hanging personalities chirp in unison, each solenoid triggering is mirrored by a motor twitching in the hanging personality.  However, as soon as someone is detected the link between the two is broken as the more aggressive standing sculpture attempts to deter the invader while the hanging personality Is too paralyzed by fear and hatred to do anything.3.5 External InteractionThis section presents Digital Rain as an example of an installations that present a mechatronic system that is effected by external factors, in this case weather information across the USA, but is unaffected by any event within its gallery. Figure 18: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo3.5.1 Digital Rain : Installation DescriptionDigital Rain is a data driven art installation, examining the crossroads of algorithmic and generative music, emergence patterns, data sonification, and technology driven systems of expression. 192 electromagnetic relay switches are arranged in a grid and mounted onto a wall. The relays are orchestrated by 6 Arduino Megas which are networked together and controlled by a hidden host computer.      A Python script gathers real-time details about weather conditions from a randomly selected meteorological station on the globe. A text-to-speech program announces the location and selected aspects of the weather report through a speaker that sits in front of the installation. Meta conditions (sunny, rain, etc.) select the base composition algorithm while the performance specifics are a factor of the forecasts wind speed, humidity, temperature and pressure. Digital Rain utilizes the mechanical ticking of the relays switching as the sonic source material for the piece. The relays, because of their precision and speed, are able to actuate fast enough to produce sustained pitch. This in addition to their idiosyncratic rhythmic snaps allows for us to create a wide variety of soundscapes. When the generative composition comes to a close, the system resets and a new station is polled.3.6 Non-InteractiveThis chapter introduces the installation Computer Music as an example of an installation that presents an electrical system as a non-interactive system. Computer Music is an ensemble of computer hard drives, floppy disk drives and CD-ROM drives. The installation consisted of a single xxx hour long composition that is performed by the ensemble throughout the course of the day-long exent it was presented at.  Figure 19: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo3.6.1 Computer Music : Installation DescriptionI have a similar approach to music composition as I have to installation signage. In general, I don’t like to tell people what to do. When I used to play in bands and would have an idea for a song. I would not write a part for everyone in the band, but would instead write my part, and think about how I would like the song to come across. We were all musicians were in the band to create music together so we would let everyone one else in the band write their own parts. We would collectively brainstorm different possibilities a give each other constructive feedback until we got everything sounding good. We trusted each other to know our own instrument that each other and respected each other’s taste. The music was great.       When writing music for an ensemble taking on the role of the composer the roles are different. Especially in the realm of networked computer music. I gave everyone the same system but vague time based commands like turn this knob to max over 30 seconds. Additionally, the score was determined in real time by a computer program. Each time though the piece the score would be different for each performer. The ensemble was a group of x students and our instructor Clay Chaplin.3.6.1.1 Approach to Interaction      One thing that sets Computer Music apart from other approaches to mechatronic instruments is the fact that the original housings for the motors are maintained. Additionally, usually with mechatronic instruments the motors and actuators are used to trigger some sort of musical instrument be it a membrane or a string. Computer music literally amplifies the sounds of the motors themselves as the primary sonic material instead of the physical work done by the motor.       Luckily for me, there has been extensive work done in the field of making music from Floppies, HDD’s and CD-ROM drives and I really just had to find the information and implement it.       So far as this project is concerned floppy drives have given me the most bang for my buck. The excellent Arduino library Moppy written and developed by the programmer SammyIAm provides an easy to use interface for playing MIDI notes on floppy drives. I was able to create a new internal MIDI bus on my Mac and pipe MIDI messages from Ableton Live to Moppy which in turn controlled the Floppy Drives.      Floppy drives take a four pin power connector that consists of one 12V, one 5V and two GND wires. This is the same pin configuration that is used by the old-school Molex connectors that all HDD’s and CD-ROM drives utilized in the early 2000’s. I grabbed an old computer power supply I had lying about and a perfboard and created three long rails for my two power connections and my ground to which I connected six floppy drives. I built custom connectors and jumpers to fool the floppies into thinking they are connected to a computer and the fun began. At this point I have determined, just like with the floppy drives, lots of mileage can be squeezed out of precise pickup placement on the drives. Here is the current state of my HDD control, pretty lame (this video uses pickups instead of piezo disks for amplification)3.7 ConclusionThis chapter presented five different approaches to HCI in the gallery.      Galleries are intentional spaces: people expect their interaction with gallery contents to be curated. Everything is examined under a fine microscope and every minute detail is interpreted, discussed, and critiqued. Mistakes are reinterpreted as intent while artificial meanings manifest. TODO:ENTER IN DESIGN OF POSSIBLE SIGNALSThis chapter presented three installations, each with a different approach to provoking human circuit interaction discourse. EChapter 4 Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCI4.1 IntroductionDirect interaction with electricity is generally not a good way to go about getting work done. In fact, when discussing electrical systems, we often speak in terms of electronic work that is performed. This is because electricity, in its raw form, is of little use: the power of electronics comes from the design and construction of many different types of electronic components that are combined in specific ways to accomplish tasks. As a result, we usually interact with electricity via a physical abstraction. For instance, when you press buttons on your microwave to make popcorn, you press a button that bridges two points in a circuit creating a connection between two parts of the circuit that did not exist before. This causes electrons to flow. You operate through the button which then operates on the circuit, changes the circuits state and electrical work is done.       This chapter discusses different approaches for creating interfaces that challenge interaction conventions between humans and electronic systems. Some of the approaches discussed, such as the Discovery Synth, by removing any abstractions for us to operate on require that the interactee becomes part of the circuitry. Approaches that bypass the interfaces of prexististing electrical systems and insert a puppeteer that controls multiple ‘puppet’ devices is presented with the Voltage Slammer and Toys projects. Techniques that involves the interception and manipulation of control data is discussed with the Synergetic SNES and 4-to-1 projects. The Retrono interfaces are discussed as examples utilizing subtractive manipulation techniques to expose systems to the direct interactions seen with the Discovery Synth project. Interfaces thatProject NameType of ProjectConvention AddressedApproach To Interface DesignHCIMHCIM NatureDiscovery SynthSynthesizer/InstallationButton/Pot AbstractionsSimplificationDirectInjectiveVoltage SlammerSequencer/Installation/Circuit Bending ToolObject interactionAbstractionAbstractedInjectiveModular SNESCircuit Bent Video Game Console / InstallationExpectationsSubversive Injection and redirectionAbstractedSubversive and InjectiveSynergetic SNESInstallationCo-operative gamingComplicationInterjectedSubversiveRetronoVideo Synthesizer/InstallationObject interactionBypassing interface, simplificationDirectInjectiveTable 1: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities4.2 Abstractive/DeconstructionFigure 20: Discovery SynthThe Discovery Synth is introduced as an example of taking a deconstructivist approach to interface design as a means of both simplifying and complicating HCIM. Simplifying by means of removing casing, and mechanical components, but complicating in terms of creating its own mode of interaction (especially in terms of the buttons).  Bring up fact that the DS is a ceremonial instrument in some regards, If you put graphite powder on your fingers in tandum with the slow response time of the sliders and other elements leaves with a meditative experience when operating the instrument. Additionally its self-contained battery operated aspects (put speakers, amp, batteries, etc in it? To make it mobile?).4.2.1 Discovery Synth : Project OverviewThe Discovery Synth is the name of a Raspberry Pi Cape I designed for Clay Chaplin and the Networked Computer Music Ensemble at CalArts in the Fall of 2015. I worked with Clay Chaplin to design a Raspberry Pi Cape that allowed for the use of sensors, LEDs, and all of the tools needed for creating a Raspberry Pi powered synthesizer. The Discovery Synthesizer is a Raspberry Pi powered interface that could be described as a “low-tech” electronic music interface. It features buttons and ‘sliders’ that I constructed personally that utilizes the human bodies electric conductivity.4.2.2 Abstracting ButtonsFigure 21: Approach to removing physical abstractions for Discovery Synth’s buttons and potsI removed the physical abstraction that separates the action of pressing and the flow of electrical current in a circuit. This is accomplished by removing the mechanical portion of the pushbutton design and by presenting the two ‘ends’ of the circuit on the interface for the interactee to bridge with their fingertips; completing the circuit. As skin is one of the most resistive type of tissue and its specific resistance varies greatly depending on the amount of pushing pressure and the amount of moisture or other contaminants found on the finger, a slight modification of the standard button circuitry had to be used. A large 10M (TODO), resistor is placed after the signal tap (see diagram that is eagle diagram of button circuit). This circuitry allowed the finger to bridge the gap between the two conductive pins, conduct enough current to complete the circuit and be consistently read by the Pi, successfully removing the need for a physical abstraction.4.2.3 Deconstructing and Abstracting PotentiometersFigure 22: Resistive Materials research for the Discovery Synth slidersAs with the buttons, the goal for the construction of the ‘sliders’ was to remove the physical abstraction that stands in the way between the human and the electrons and to create a more direct interaction. The sliders removed the wiper from typical potentiometer or slider design and instead relied on the user physically connecting the leads to a resistive strip (see figure 24).It used 32 gauge kanthal wire (a sort of restive wire that feels similar to iron, has a resistance of about 30 ohms a foot, is quite brittle, and the form that I used is most commonly seen in electronic cigarettes; as a heating source for vaporizing various flavors of goo. As I wanted to use a material that was as resistive as possible I chose to use the smallest wire I could use before running the risk of injuring the user. The 32 AWG gauge wire that was used measured in as a mere 8 thousandths of an inch thick.      The wire was strung across two bridges; one wooden and one metal. The wire hovers over a strip of copper tape that has an extremely low resistance; less than 1 Ohm a foot. One end of the tungsten wire is attached to system ground while the other end is connected to the power rail on the Raspberry Pi. When the tungsten wire is pressed against the copper tape a voltage divider is created. Unfortunately, as the wires have such low resistance, the voltage dividers draw a fairly large amount of current; 110mA each. Unlike a Microcontroller such as the Arduino the Raspberry Pi 2 has very low maximum output current ratings over the GPIO pins. The Pi 2 was designed with the spec of 3mA current draw from each of the pins, with a maximum draw of 16mA from a single pin or 51mA from the entire device. that this project was built for has a maximum current draw of is limited to max current draw of XXXXX the combined current draw of all eight of my deconstructed sliders was more than the Pi could handle at 880mA. The solution was to add a resistor in series with the tungsten wire with a value of 1k. Unfortunately, this greatly reduced the fidelity of the signal received from the sensor, but with some software smoothing it was usable given the fact that the controller also included eight vanilla pots that could be mapped to anything requiring more precision.      This circuitry allowed for the performer to directly complete the circuitry for the voltage divider without acting through a physical abstraction. There is no barrier between the human finger and the electrons flowing through the synthesizer. This gives this instrument a quality that is somewhat unique within the real of computer interfaces; it will electronically react differently to different people depending on that persons unique electrical properties. Figure 23: Discovery Synth as one controller for the Yin~Yang interactive installation in 2015.4.3 Circuit Exposure for Direct HCIFigure 24: Second version of the Retrono SynthesizersDirect Human Circuit Interaction, for the purpose of this paper. includes any interaction modality that involves our bodies becoming a part of the circuit. The Retrons are literally turned inside out11 and repackaged in custom enclosures. With their circuitry unveiled, and with no software to guide their computational logic, the Retrons becomes very susceptible to electro-magnetic interference. The Retrons are effectively transformed into 8-bit a/v synthesizers that generate their output based on the electrical noise present in the circuit.      Cathode Ray Tubes explores unconventional approaches for human-circuit interaction by eliminating all sensors, buttons, knobs and all other “middle-men” between the circuit and the user. It empowers us to utilize the natural electrical properties of our bodies to directly control the normally hidden circuitry that we are surrounded by but removed from in our daily lives.      Cathode Ray Tubes attempts to bring to light our effect of electronics. It shows that our physical bodies have electrical properties unto themselves and that our mere presence void of intent, sends ripples through nearby electrical systems. It seeks to flip the dialogue of how we are effected by the constant presence of electrical devices and asks “How does the constant presence of human bodies effect the electrical systems?”.      Four CRT TV’s are arranged in a semicircle each on its own small table. In front of each TV is a video synthesizer with its circuitry exposed. The TV’s and the synths are each connected in a feedback loop with each synth reacting to electric field emanating from the TV it is placed in front of. Gallery goers are invited into the space to discover that their bodies natural electrical properties are all they need to begin seizing control over the installations a/v feedback loop.      Cathode Ray Tubes is an interactive, audio-visual installation that sonifies and visualizes the human bodies electrical properties by demonstrating the effect our bodies have on electronic circuitry. Four modified Retrons are placed in close proximity to CRT TV’s within the installation space. This allows the static electricity produced by the TV’s to interact with the Retrons circuitry, modulating their audio and video outputs. The Retrons are connected in such a way that the video output of each Retron reverberates through all other units in one large feedback loop.  Audio is generated for the space by the Retrons in the same manner as the video. This combined configuration creates a resting state for the installation that is in constant flux as all the Retrons and TV’s are feeding off of each other’s electrical fields.      As the entire system is presented in a manner that emphasizes instability and assailability, the human body becomes an effective controller: due to its inherent electrical properties. Acts such as waving a hand in front of a TV or Retron, touching a TV or a Retron, moving a Retron’s angle or distance from a TV and combinations of the above (touching a Retron and placing your hand a few inches away from a TV) will produce different effects that resonate throughout the feedback loop. If multiple people are in the gallery space, the installation scales nicely as the number and complexity of the effects produce even more drastic results in the Retron feedback loop.      Cathode Ray Tubes is designed to create a space of discovery that invites viewers to forge their own personal experience with the environment and its circuitry, and the goal of the installation is not that each gallery goer manipulates the feedback loop in every possible way, but rather that most gallery participants explore a relationship with the circuitry that feels unique to them. As with Electrical Box this installation did little to directly tell participants how to interact with the space.4.3.1 Repackaging and Re-appropiationDesigning the Retronos is an act of removal and replacement in terms of the circuitry as no additions we made to the Retron consoles. After completely removing the original plastic cases, the controller ports were de--soldered amd the red power LED’s were replaced with white ones.4.3.2 Approach to InteractionAkin to the Discovery Synth project, Cathode Ray Tubes did not have any specific ‘rail’ of interaction and the installation was not strictly interactive (TODO REFERENCE THAT ONE QUOTE FROM MEASONS THESIS). The sysstems were happy of oscillate ont their own accord: without the presence of humans. They tolerated our presence.	4.4 Re-Appropriation of ConventionsThe Modular SNES is introduced in this section as an example of an interfact that challenges HCIM through the re-appropiation of established interaction conventions. 4.4.1 Modular SNES : Project Descriptionis the natural continuation of my work with the circuit bent SNES’s that are used in the installation 199012 I developed in early 2015. My first success with console bending was with an old SNES I had. After carefully opening the case and looking at the circuitry inside I started researching the role each IC played in the workings of the device. After a little poking around I was able to pinpoint the video memory chips which contained the information used for rendering the video and could start experimenting.  Luckily, unlike other consoles I have worked with, with the SNES all the ROM13 and video chips are easily accessible and bends were plentiful.      Wanting to keep the project simple I decided to simply check each via to ground for any sort of effect. I turned the console on and started making connections. About 30% of the vias were receptacle to some sort of modulation. I carefully marked these active connections on a printout of the circuit board I made. After testing everything I reviewed my sheet and narrowed down my choices, I had too many bends to implement. I soldered leads from a ribbon cable to the vias until two ribbons were filled. I cut a little piece of plastic from the back of the case to fit the ribbon cables through and soldered one last wire to the GND rail on the SNES. I closed up the console, put the screws back in place and started gaming.4.5 Deception This section presents the Symbiotic SNES (SSNES) as an example of deceptive HCIM. The SSNES  intercepts controller messages from two seemingly unaffected controllers and alters the data before sending it to the unaware SNES console. What makes this interface deceptive is the fact that there is no indication to either the SNES or the Player that an agent is acting on the data. The SSNES acts a asabiteur or psiopperative, coloring the data into misinformation.4.5.1 Symbiotic SNES : Project Description      The Symbiotic SNES system is an attempt to create new experiences from familiar technology. Two SNES controllers are attached to an Arduino Mega that mimics a SNES console and decodes the controller information, such as button presses, performs computation on the data, and sends the data in a modified state to an actual SNES. What the system does depends on he current operating mode.       There have been over a dozen modes created to this date spread between two main types: single player and multiplayer modes. The single player modes are all different ways that two participants are able to play a single player game together assisted the Symbiotic SNES. For example, the “Agree” mode only sends messages (button presses) to the SNES if both of the input controllers are pressing the same button at the same time.  The “Both Control” mode grants both input controllers full agency over the SNES by summing the input from the two controllers into one stream of information sent to the SNES. “Teamwork” functions by only accepting one button press from each player at a time: if you want to run and jump one input controller must be pressing the run button while the other must press the  jump button. There are also a few alternating modes that only give one player control at a time, but shifts the control back and forth between the two input controller according to the number of buttons pressed or a time period.      The second category of modes are the multiplayer modes which were designed to be used when playing a multiplayer competitive game. 4.6 Orchestrating Circuitry (One-To-Many)Figure 25: The Voltage SlammerThe Voltage Slammer is not only a mechanism for controlling circuit bent electronics but it also a platform for assisting in the act of circuit bending itself. The Voltage Slammer is an ongoing exploration in controlling circuit bent toys and instruments with Arduino powered interfaces. The Voltage Slammer interface was shown within the context of the interactive installation Toys at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo where the interface controlled four Farmer Says, a robotic talking bear, and two keyboards. 4.6.1 Approach to InteractionThe front of the interface has a built in ultra-sonic sensor allowing for the entire unit to be shut off when no one is within a reasonable distance. When the installation is idol, it will remain off for just under a minute before pulsing all its channels, basically calling out for interactees, it will continue repeating this cycle until someone approaches in which it will turn itself on. Thanks to its ultrasonic rangefinder the Voltage Slammer was aware of the presence of humans. When no-one was near the device the device entered into a resting state. It stopped sending continuous signals to its circuit bent minions and was mostly silent, allowing the toys to complete the cycles they might have been currently engaged in. The Voltage Slammer will then proceed to randomly pulse one of the devices every two minutes. This is an act to silicate attention from anyone in the gallery. Once the presence of a body is detected by the voltage slammer the device will enter into its active state; again sending messages out to its toys.	The result of the Voltage Slammers interaction with its circuit bent toys was in a state of constant flux: it was hard to predict what the actual results might be from one sitting to another. The system would behave differently if there was 5 devices connected or 10 devices as each new device that was added changed the electronic properties of the system. Chapter 5 Approaches to Mechatronic Performances5.1 Humans Leading Intelligent Mechatronic InstrumentalistsRobots Whispers and I’m Hungry are two examples of performance that present reactive  mechatronic system that are listening to the input from human performances to determine their course of action.  5.1.1 Robot Whispers - Performance DescriptionRobot Whispers was performed for the Composing for Robots class at CalArts in the Fall of 2014. The piece was composed in collaboration with Eric Heep and Danny XXXX. Throughout the course of the performance a text score is algorhymically generated by a program in real time. The score contains information about the word that should be spoken and the tone in which it should be uttered. Eric and Danny followed the text score and quietly spoke the words into personal microphones that were processed with reverb and delay before being amplified and sent through quad sound into the performance space. The microphones have a STFT performed on the input spectrum in real time. The system split the spectrum up into three bands each representing the high, mid, and low frequencies. My job throughout the course of the performance is to use a Mini-Korg controller to control a threshold for each of the three frequency bins. If the overall amplitude of the band is higher than the threshold that I set, the robots will chime in and play with us: attempting to echo our language. Three groups are made with the robots in the Machine Lab dividing up their various actuator into a high, medium and low group. Each of the three actuator groups are mapped to the FFT groups so that each FFT group corresponds to its equivalent actuator group.	 5.1.2 I’m Hungry – Performance DescriptionThis is the performance where we feed the bot.5.2 Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for HumansThis section examines two different performances that exhibited mechatronic ensembles performing music composed by and performed for the enjoyment of humans.5.2.1 BeatlesComposition for Robots 2015 final piece.5.2.2 Hello HumansComposition for Robots 2016 final piece. 5.3 Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves This section discussed Computer Music and No Humans Allowed as examples of a Mechatronic performances that are conducted for the enjoyment of the Robot Performers: Computer Music is reintroduced within the context of musical performance. presented as an installation is actually a performance. The composition is a long scale phase piece that is more composed to be interesting for the performers than the viewers. 	Just because these pieces are conceived as for the enjoyment of the robots that does not exclude humans from observing the activity and formulating their own appreciation. What makes these works for the bot is the fact that humans are either not intended and are unable to experience the unaltered composition (in the case of NHA) or, in the case of Computer Music, the composition is written on a scale that is not aligned with a humans temporal orientation. 5.3.1 Computer Music – As a Performance5.3.2 Antisocial – As a Performnace5.4 Mechatronic Personalities“A robotic musical instrument is a sound-making device that automatically creates music with the use of mechanical parts, such as motors, solenoids and gears.”(Kapur 1) 5.4.1 No Humans Allowed – As a Performance5.5 Conclusion Chapter 6 Conclusion6.1 SummaryRestating the problem and summary of thesis scope.We are surrounded by such technological wonders that are capable of such wonderous things that we are forced to often interact with electronics within the context of layers uoon layers of abstractions. The work discussed in this thesis seeks to re-open the discussion of how we interact with electrical systems on the most fundamental way. How our bodies electrical properties coexist and affect the electromagnetic devices that we co-exist with in our modern era.By bringing light to our mutural effects on each other my work hopes to bring about a sense of electromagnetic empathy.6.2 Primary ContributionsRestate the primary contributions discussed in the thesis.This thesis presented a wide variety of interfaces, installations, and performances that approaches human circuit interaction as a focal source of inspiration and focus. Each example was analyzed in terms of its human-circuit interaction modality and challenged the societal conventention in one way or another6.3 Final ThoughtsYour big ideas and final conclusions. We try to make the robot act like a human, but it is creepy. ** give example of the toster guy””” imagine how imposible the iPhone guy, or the TV guy would be.Creating art that demands unconventional interaction modalities must reinvent the gallery space.Chapter 7 Appendix The appendix goes into technical depth about the systems used in the authors installations, interfaces, and projects mentioned in this thesis.7.1 Pantheon Mechatronic SystemPantheon is a mechatronic art system that is an adaptation of the MTIID servers that control all of the mechatronic instruments residing in the CalArts Machine Lab. The system is structured to be as modular, flexible, and easy to learn as possible and provides the technological core of my mechatronic installations.7.1.1 ServerThe Pantheon server is written in ChucK and utilizes a variety of shielded Arduino Uno and Megas as clients. Upon initialization the server uses a handshake routine to determine the client configuration. If sensor Arduinos are found the server will start a separate process that listens to sensors found on the network. If actuator Arduinos are found the server will determine the hierarchy between all of the clients. If groups of Arduinos are found together they will be linked under a single OSC address in addition to their individual addresses.  Once the server is running, a supplementary pythons script can be run to convert MIDI messages found on an internal IAC bus into the OSC messages that The Pantheon understands. This allows for the actuators to be controlled by any programming language, or program that is able to output either MIDI or OSC messages.7.1.1.1 SensorsTo handle the reading of sensors, such as with the Theia boards when SR-04 Ultrasonia Rangefinds are used the following approach is used. When the server is initialized a shred is sporked that consists of an infinite loop that polls each of the Theias for their sensor readings.A separate shred is sporked during initialization that listens for responces from Theia, if any are heard it updateds the Orchestrator which manages the actions of each of the actuator shields.7.1.1.2 ConducterThe conductor orchestrates all of the actuator shields and keeps track of the moods of each of the personalities.7.1.1.3 HandshakeEach of the Pantheon bots utilize the same handshake routine. TODO: add sniplets of codeThe server sends a handshake message to each of the arduinos attached to the host. The arduinos recognize the message as a handshake message and respond with three bytes. The first is the Personality Number that the shsield belongs to, the second is the type of shield it is and the third is the number of that kind of shield it is.7.1.1.4 OSCThe server uses OSC messages to orchestrate control between different clients and servers.The OSC messages are: /xyz/n/v x= The Personality Numbery = the board type (1:brigid, 2:homados, 3:hermes, 4:theia)z= boarb number of that type within the personalityn= note (0-63)v= velocity (0-1023)7.1.2 ShieldsThere are many different shield that have been designed for use with the Patheon system. There are two main catagories of shields: controllers and observers. The controller boards are primarally intended to be send messages and then activate some sort of electro-mechanical, or luminestance device. The observer boards, while also capable of receiving messages, send information back to the Pantheon server. All of the shields share some common traits for consistency. All connectors to the boards are Molex Mini-Fix Jr. 2pos. They can handle up to xxA and xxV and conform to a 4.27mm from pitch. All of the boards are designed as  the tops of the connecters are always ground. As the Mini-Fit Jr. connectors are polarized there is no risk of causing damage to the system as result up plugging a connector into the wrong place. 7.1.2.1 BrigidBrigid is the smallest of the three general purpose actuator boards and it categorized as a controller. Brigid has a RGB status LED for keeping track of its running state, six channels of control of solenoids, DC motrs, LED strips or similar devices, and a input jack for an external power source. The second version of the board includes a JST conector for a I2C sensor, and a switch that allows the Arduino to easily be powered by the same power source as the actuators.((((((((ADD PICTURE OF TRANSISTOR CICUIT)))))))))))))The control channels consist of a T460 MOSFET transistors whose base pin is connected to one of the Arduino Uno’s PWM pins through a 1k resistor in series. The XXX of the transistor is connected to the output of the jack with a diode Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx7.1.2.2 HomadosHomados  is the smaller of the two Arduino Mega controller shields in the Pantheon system and supports 16 channels of actuator control and two JST I2C sensors, a RGB led, and a switch for powering the Arduino off of the external power and a switch for choose between 3.3V and 5V I2C power. (PERHAPS DON’T MAKE THIS A SWITCH AND INSTEAD USE PADS AND A JUMPER WIRE).7.1.2.3 ThorThor is the Largest controller board. It supports 48 channels of actuator control, three JST I2C sensors, a RGB led, and a switch for powering the Arduino off of the external power and a switch for choose between 3.3V and 5V I2C power. Thor is a little different from Homados and  Brigid  in the sense that is had 3 banks of 16 channels. Each of the banks are independent from one other, although they can optionally be connected using switches to create one single large bank. (PERHAPS DON’T MAKE THIS A SWITCH AND INSTEAD USE PADS AND A JUMPER WIRE).7.1.2.4 HermesHermes is the stepper motor control shield that contains two H-bridges that allow for the control of up to four stepper motors7.1.2.5 Theia7.2 Project BackgroundsThis section elaborates on the motivation behind select projects mentioned in this thesis.7.2.1 Retronos – Virtue of Expirimentation      Sometimes art falls on your lap and it is your job tell people about it. That was the case with Cathode Ray Tubes. I was looking for inexpensive alternatives to the NES14 to experiment with circuit bending. I was in the middle of developing my Modular SNES and was looking to expand my efforts to consoles besides the SEGA Genesis and the SNES15. I ordered a Retron video game console that was basically a cheap Chinese knock-off of the original NES. The simple device ran off of two chips a XXxxxxxx and a xxxxxxxxx. At first when I opened the case and examined the circuitry I was disappointed at how sparse the PCB was. When circuit bending devices you want lots of through-hole components and large IC’s with lots of pins. Most everything on the board was surface mount and I was unable to get too many interesting bends on my first pass. I, for some reason, decided to experiment and removed the gaming cartridge from the device and booted it up. I was amazed that it displayed a beautiful 8bit quazi-random image. The entire console, additionally, became hyper sensitive to EM interference. If you touched the board it would begin to oscillate and create some very interesting patterns. 7.3 Technical NotesThis section discuses technical specifics related to the hardware and software design of the installations and projects introduced in this thesis.7.3.1 Electrical Box - Radio ReceiversBuilding radios from scratch was the first thing I worked on after the EavesDroppers were designed. I bought an assortment of AM and FM receiver breakout boards, namely the AR1010 and Si4703. I found it difficult to prototype using the tiny IC packages16 that the receivers were manufactured as and soon realized the complexity of designing a descent radio receiver. The research concluded that building custom radio receivers would be far too costly in time and dollars to justify for this project.       My research proved that I had no aesthetic, technical or financial advantages to building my own radio receivers. (TODO PERHAPS THIS SUCKS?) I had a few things to consider: price, portability, sustainability and accessibility. I needed at least 8 radios so they could not be too expensive. Also because of the number needed I did not find it feasible to go thrift store shopping for them. Ultimately, I settled on a cheap radio17 because it was about $12.00, is USB18 powered, tuned into both AM and FM bands, had a 1/8th inch output, was small and had good reviews. The fact that the radios were powered by USB allowed me to have less overhead in terms of power strips and cable mass. I was able to use a USB charging block19 to power all of the radios for the 10 days EB was active. 7.3.2 Electrical Box - EavesDroppersThe EavesDropper design priorities were cost effectiveness, simplicity, and reliability. Each system consists of a small metal tin with a pair of Telex headphones plugged into the side. Inside each of the tins, there is a single-coil guitar pickup, a stereo amplifier, a ¼” headphone jack, and a lithium ion battery.       The amplifiers I used are small 1.85 x 2.11 cm breakout boards that house PAM8403 ICs20. The breakout boards simply provided a few caps and resistors for power conditioning as well as some pads that created a through-hole interface to the PAM84403: which is a surface mount component. Though inexpensive, the PAM8403 suited the project nicely. It has a filter-less architecture allowing it to drive a speaker load directly; without the need of any additional gain stages, filtering, or components. They are relatively efficient as a Class-D amplifier and consume less power than comparable Class AB or Class A amplifiers. They operate off of a supply voltage between 2.5 and 5.5 volts, allowing them to be powered directly with a Lithium-ion battery.(“PAM8403.pdf”)       The batteries are rechargeable 3.7V 4000mAh lithium ion batteries. To save space and money, I abstained from the use of battery cases in favor of soldering male JST21 RC battery plugs directly to the terminals of the batteries22. I wrapped the batteries and cables in electrical tape and coated the ends with liquid electrical tape. This insulated the batteries from the metallic case, saved space while providing an interface for hot-swapping the batteries.       In the WaveCave control room, I kept three PowerBoost 500c’s to charge my batteries as they were depleted. The batteries charged in about two hours and on a full charge were able to power the EavesDroppers for a minimum of 46 hours at a time. The PowerBoost line of breakout boards from Adafruit have been my go-to power solution for embedded projects in need of 5V for a few years now. These handy little boards boost the usable voltage from a lithium-ion battery to 5v while also providing a way to charge the battery via a USB jack. The 500c model handles 500mA of current, while other boards in the line can handle larger loads.       Figure 26: EavesDroppers Circuit DiagramFigure 27: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronicsThe EavesDropper system is the technological heart of EB. The devices leverage the properties of EM inductance to sense changes in a magnetic field that the device emits. Changes in its own field resulting from external sources creates a voltage difference in the device causing a small current to flow. This signal is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones where it is transduced into acoustic energy in the form of sound. (TODO, EXPAND EXPLINATION OF WHAT IS ACTUALLY GOING ON WITH THE TECH). EnclosureFor most installations I create, my first instinct is to design laser cut cases out of clear acrylic to house the circuitry. For EB, this approach would have conflicted with the installations aesthetics. Radio technology and the era in which radio use was ubiquitous with family time and recreation, was a time of metal, fake wood grain: not the smooth, polished acrylic I am usually drawn to.  The flat metal tins used are apropos, simple, and were timelessly generic: they would not have looked out of place in 1910, 1950, 1980 or even today. 	Knowing that the devices would be heavily used in the coming weeks, I wanted to ensure the circuitry remain intact and in a static position. To avoid stress breaks on the wires, I hot-glued all the solder points going to and from the headphone jack and amplifier breakout board. Additionally, I wrapped the amplifier board in electrical tape to prevent any shorting with other components and/or the metal case. The pickup was particularly troublesome as it has a large fixed bar magnet on the bottom. This magnet pulls the pickup away from the front of the case to the back of the unit. If allowed to happen, the effective listening distance of the EavesDropper dramatically decreases. Lastly, whenever the pickup moves by even the smallest amount it produces a huge amount of highly dissonant disturbing noise. An unfortunate byproduct of the metal cases is that the case noises are abundant and are amplified by the EavesDroppers circuitry. After some troubleshooting and experimentation, multiple layers of foam poster tape were used to secure the pickup, as well as the battery, to the front of the EavesDropper units. This provided maximum listening distance, secured all of the heavy components, and allowed me to balance the weight distribution within the tin.Figure 28: Telex 520 Headphones used in Electrical Box      My first instinct, as a studio engineer, was to get the highest quality headphones I could afford for the EavesDroppers. I looked at SONY, Sennheizer, AKG and other manufacturers of quality audiophile headphones. However, buying something new and manufactured in 2016 would violate the aesthetic and the artistic integrity of the installation. The installation is tring to present radio technology in a technological zeitgeist that is most representative of its rein in the 50’s. I settled on Telex 520-01 headphones; (TODO, more information about the headphones?)      The headphones ended up having the perfect cable lengths: at 59 inches, they were long enough to comfortably extend out your arms with the EavesDroppers without it tugging on your head but not so long that you were at risk of tripping on the cables while exploring the space. Their styling is a throwback to switchboard telephone operators and the associated technology, helping to set a timeframe for the installation. In alignment with their retro aesthetic they had a matching sound. They were a bit tinny, with a weak bass response and had little presence. Luckily, EB by design is a low fidelity system. Radio is famously lo-fi with very little information in the extreme ends of the audible sonic spectrum. Not only would hi-fi headphones be underutilized, they would also be detrimental to the experience; both tactilely and visually.7.3.3 Modular SNES – Technical DetailsFigure 29: Modular SNES, first of three designs.Internally, most all of the electrical signals that dictate the operations of the SNES console operates on a 5v logic level(“Snes_schematic_color.pdf”).      The Modular SNES, however, does not only provide a path to ground for these bends but instead opens them up to the world by porting the connections to the outside via 1/8th inch ports. The Modular SNES also has an Arduino Nano hidden inside with four input jacks, four analogue pots as well as its own 8 outputs. All of the inputs and outputs also have their own 1/8th inch jacks. The Modular synth allows for all of its 14 or 17 bends (depending on model) to either control the output of the Arduino or be bent by the Arduino or each other.7.3.4 Discovery Synth – Technical Details- Cape allowed for buttons, sensors, more analogue inlets- - pi GPIO pins alone suckThe Cape was designed to be generic and, Two MCP3008 8-channel 10-bit A/D converters are used to read 16 voltage dividers. 12 buttons, two LEDs and pinouts for a LCD monitor are included on the cape as well. 	The ensemble used Pure Data to read in the input states of the buttons and pots/sliders and provided the synthesis engine as well. Everyone in the ensemble was able to choose what specific components they used for the buttons and voltage dividers.  Although I used conventional potentiometers for 8 of my voltage dividers I took unconventional approaches to the other 8 voltage dividers and 8 buttons. 7.3.5 Symbiotic SNES - Technical DetailsTwo SNES knock off controllers have their plugs cut off and wires stripped. The SNES controller uses five wires to communicate with the SNES console. The SNES powers the circuitry on the controller with the first two wires which are 5V and GND. The other three pins are for communication: Clock, Latch and Data. Thanks to the XXXXX Arduino library it is just a simple matter of  (INSERT CODE) to read in incoming controller data. Once the Arduino knows which buttons are being pressed on the two input controllers it performs its logic before flipping digital pins that are connected to pads with wires soldered into them whose other ends are soldered to each of the button pads of a SNES controller. When the sensing side of the button  pad reads 5v it sends an ‘ON’ messages to the SNES, instead of the controller receiving this voltage via the bridging of the two sides of the button, the Arduino mimics this be sending its own voltage to the pad.       As oppose to my other work with SNES consoles this project is completely portable. The Symbiotic SNES system will work on any production SNES ever made and is not tied to any hardware modifications to the console itself. As the SNES’s internal voltage level is most always 5v, the console lends itself nicely to interfacing with Arduino microcontrollers, in this project the Arduino is directly powered through its output connections to the SNES console.        The SNES controllers buttons are purely binary, meaning they are either on or off with no alternative: this lends itself nicely to bitwise logic operations. In fact, that is how all of the first mods started out.  If the controller inputs from the two controllers have a bitwise AND performed on them the resulting interaction will be that no messages get sent through unless both controllers are pressing the same button at the same time: which is the “Agree” mode. Likewise, if a XOR is performed on the incoming controller data only buttons that are pressed on a single controller are sent through, but if both controller press the button they cancel each other out and no message is sent to the host.7.3.6 Voltage Slammer - Technical DetailsAll of the devices were bent using the interface. The interface utilized RCA connectors between the circuit bent devices and the interface. This was because of the inexpensive nature of these connectors and the fact that they had two points of connection, as oppose to say, a Banana Jack. RCA jacks have the added benefit of taking up little space on the inside of the unit. This is very important when circuit bending small electronic devices that often have very little extra space in their cases.      After the Toys installation was shown at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo I decided to redesign the interface to feature 16 rotary knobs with built in push buttons and RGB23 LEDs. I replaced the SPST24 toggle switches with large sleeker metal pushbuttons, also with LED’s inside. The current interface is powered by an Arduino Mega and can be either batter powered or powered via USB. It functions both as a controller for specially hacked toys or electronic devices or as a useful tool for hardware hacking and circuit probing/bending. It is designed specifically for working with low voltage DC circuits and can’t handle anything high voltage or high current. Its first eight output channels are PWM25 waves each with a pot controlling intensity (PW) and a switch to cut off the current flow entirely. The first eight outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation.      The next five outputs are in effect the same as the first eight with the noticeable exception that they have no feedback LEDS, no on/off switches and are arranged on the interface in a separate group. They are intended to be used to control motors in bent devices, or any other bend in which you desire a constant current and don’t want the output to be effected by the master delay pot. When Toys was presented at the Digital Arts Expo these outputs controlled the talking robotic bear. In the rear of the device all 13 outputs are accessible via RCA connectors, with the ring connected to a common ground and the internal pin the hot signal. In addition, there is one additional RCA connection in which both the ring and pin are connected to ground, to allow for easier probing and bending.7.4 Secondary ThemesThis is where I am putting things that I don’t want to toally delete at this point.7.4.1 Electrical Box - Complication of Radio InteractionFigure 30: Transduction and Gain steps in signal flow for installationElectrical Box complicates the already complex array of technologies and techniques used to transmit and receive audio information over the radio spectrum as a way to bring light to the scale and omnipresence of radio communication technology.      The signal eventually heard by the interactee through their EavesDropper headphones went though many manifestations before existing in the visitors mind as electrical impulses. Lets take the example of a DJ introducing the next song in his radio set. The DJ thinks of what she is going to say, her thoughts are transmitted to muscles in her neck and mouth, which mechanically oscillate her vocal cords to produce acoustic compressions and rarefactions in the atmospheric pressure creating what is commonly referred to sound waves. These sound waves travel a few feet across the studio where they vibrate the diaphragm of a microphone. The microphone converts the diaphragm’s acoustic vibrations into analog electrical energy, meaning that the signal has a continuous voltage. The analog signal is then converted into a digital one consisting of 1’s and 0’s before being converted back into an analogue signal which is amplified by several orders of magnitude before being converted into a EM wave that is broadcast throughout the world. (TODO, satellites and actually research the signal flow dummy) The waves are decoded be a terrestrial radio, often hundreds of miles away, back into a relatively accurate approximation of the electronic data that left the broadcasting studio a fraction a second in the past. The signal is amplified and converted into sound waves by the radio’s speaker(s), which travel through the room until it comes into contact with someone’s eardrum. The eardrum is a thin membrane that vibrates in reaction to changes in the atmospheric pressure. Its vibrations are amplified mechanically by bones in our inner ear that, in turn, are attached to other membranes which are set into motion. These membranes cause liquid in the cochlea to move back and forth causing tiny hairs to become agitated. The agitated hairs send electrical signals to the auditory lobe of our brain which decodes the information into what we perceive as sound (“Understanding How the Ear Works”). EB complicates this already complex order of transmission, transduction and perception by adding another abstraction (magnetic inductance), into the signal chain.       In EB, the radios tune into and decode radio waves pulsating through the gallery into analog electric signals. The signals are amplified before being sent through the unbalanced instrument cables hanging in the gallery. The cables each have 16ohm resistors at their ends which bridge the positive and negative leads: this provides what I call a “specter load”. Spector load implies the resistors are placeholders for something more tangible: the absent speakers. The specter resistor allows the system to get electronic work done and is essential to creating a strong enough magnetic field to be sensed with the electromagnetic transducer residing in the EavesDroppers. Once the pickups inside of the EavesDroppers detect the field, they produce an electronic current which is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones worn by a gallery interactee. The EavesDroppers, in practice, function as a second receiver: they pull energy out of the air and decode the music hidden inside just like the radios do. The EavesDroppers, however, have a much shorter range and are limited to detecting changes in its magnetic field: they operate entirely off of magnetism. Still to this day, most people tend to think of magnetism and electricity as separate entities. (TODO find evidence of this) I will even go out onto a limb to say that more people are comfortable with the nature of light being both a wave and a particle than with the inherent linkage between electricity and magnetism.
Bibliography“CABINET // Invisible Cities: An Interview with Christina Kubisch.” N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Sept. 2016.Ghazala, Reed. Circuit-Bending: Build Your Own Alien Instruments. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2005. Print.Hinkle-Turner, Elizabeth. Women Composers and Music Technology in the United States: Crossing the Line. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2006. Print.Kapur, Ajay. “A History of Robotic Musical Instruments.” ICMC. Citeseer, 2005. Google Scholar. Web. 15 Feb. 2017.“Leonardo Da Vinci | Italian Artist, Engineer, and Scientist | Britannica.com.” N.p., n.d. Web. 15 Feb. 2017.Net, Media Art. “Media Art Net | Kubisch, Christina: Sound Flow Light Source – Forty Pillars and One Room.” text. N.p., 5 Oct. 2016. Web. 5 Oct. 2016.“PAM8403.pdf.” Web. 31 Oct. 2016.“Snes_schematic_color.pdf.” : n. pag. Print.“The War of the Currents: AC vs. DC Power.” Energy.gov. N.p., n.d. Web. 14 Nov. 2016.“Understanding How the Ear Works.” Hearing Link. N.p., n.d. Web. 12 Nov. 2016.1 Electromagnetic2 Do It Yourself – The method of building, modifying or repairing things without the direct aid of experts or professionals3 Printed Circuit Boards4 A black box is a device or system that is viewed in terms of its transfer characteristics (inputs and outputs) without any knowledge of its internal workings.5 Museum of Modern Art, New York City, New York, USA6 Los Angeles County of Art, Los Angeles, California, USA7 In video game design a game is considered to be “on-rail” if the manner the player travels is pre-determined on a line, as if literally on rails. This originally was done to allow for the use of high production backgrounds and higher quality pre-rendered graphics. Over time this technical approach to game design has become a stylistic one that still persists today. Examples of games that are on-rail include the Star Fox, Time Crisis, and The House of the Dead series.8 The gallery is 20 feet wide, 20 feet long and 10 feet high9 See figure 910 The sport or practice of exploring or studying caves: especially when performed as a hobby.11 The circuit boards are exposed while the buttons, controller jacks and cartridge ports are removed.12 The SNES that were used for the installation were re-designed and manufactured in 1990. I found these models the easiest to work with.13 Read Only Memory14 Nintendo Entertainment System was a popular 8-bit video game console that was in production from July 15th, 1983 (1985 in the States) until 2003 (1995 in the States).15 Super Nintendo Entertainment System was the 16-bit predecessor to the NES (also known as the Super Famicom outside of the Americas). The SNES was in production from 1991 (1990 in Japan) to 1999 (2003 in Japan).16 The AR1010 FM breakout board is 1.1x1.1cm while the Si4703 was too expensive for the project at 19.95 on sparkfun.com17 Mfine 938B 18 Universal Serial Bus19 Sabrent 60Watt Desktop USB Rapid Charger20 The PAM8403 is a 3 watt, Class-D, stereo amplifier that is common and inexpensive.21 Budget interconnection company that is cost effective alternative to Molex. Most commonly seen with battery jacks and plugs in hobbyist projects.22 I do not recommend anyone does this themselves.23 Red, Green and Blue24 Single pole single throw : a switch that has two states and one channel25 Pulse Wave Modification : A high frequency digital signal that has a variable duty cycle allowing for a pseudo variable voltage.[NV1]To explore unvconventional interaction modalities between humans and circuity to foster discovery[NV2]Perhaps this entire section can be removed…[NV3]Should talk about EB as being neutral, CRT as being human centric, causing the circuitry dismay and discomfort.  NHA being circuit-centrt, with its hostal nature to outside human presence.--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------i