California Institute of the ArtsElectromagnetic Translucenceartistic approaches to interaction design for installations, interfaces, and mechatronic performancebyNathan Villicaña-ShawA thesis submitted in partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Fine ArtsHerb Alpert School of MusicMusic Technology: Interaction, Intelligence & Design2017
Supervisory CommitteeAjay Kapur, Ph.D.							MentorOwen Vallis, Ph.D.			   			     Committee MemberSpencer Salazar, Ph.D.							Committee Member

AbstractThis thesis presents a variety of approaches for complicating, simplifying or exposing human- circuit interaction within the context of interactive installation art, interface design, and mechatronic performance. After a brief background of related work, this document presents several interactive-installations that each exhibit different approaches to human-circuit interaction. Next, an assortment of electronic-interfaces are discussed in terms of their approach to human-circuit interfacing. An overview of The Pantheon, the authors comprehensive system for creating mechatronic instruments and sound art, along with a sampling of mechatronic performances are discussed in the final section.       The primary goals of this work include (1) presenting a corpus of work that is concerned with human-circuit interaction modalities, (2) exploring the creation and dissolution of abstractions separating humans from circuitry, and (3) to explore the idea of mechatronic/electronic personalities.
AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank my loving and supportive, family that have always believed in my abilities and have given me the freedom to explore what interests me. Kimby my beautiful, loving, partner that I am so blessed to have by my side to share this beautiful life with. I want to thank my parents for giving me my tireless worth ethic, sense of moral duty, and love of life.       My mentors, Ajay Kapur and Owen Vallis who have always had my best interest in mind and who have given me the chance to prove myself and my abilities.       I would also like to thank all the professors, instructors, and faculty at CalArts who have guided, inspired, and motivated me throughout the past four years. Tom Jennings for helping me to break free from the technology in my art. Sarah Roberts for helping me to start thinking about space, sound, and interaction in new ways. Spencer Salazar, for his calm wisdom. Clay Chaplin for embracing me as one of his own students.      I would also like to thank all the friends and colleagues that I have studied, collaborated, and learned with throughout the years. Special thanks to Mason for inspiring me to think in larger scale, and for his respectful grace as an artist and human. Peter Blasser, Evelina Dominitch, Dimitry Gelfand, Mike Leize, Shaurja Benaurje.      Wolfgang, my dear friend, who is longer with us for his friendship, support, and talks.       Those who I lost contact with but influenced me artistically: John Meagher, Jarred Wikowfsky, Pat Dibert, Keith Bishop, Tessa Bishop.
ContentsAbstract	vAcknowledgments	viiContents	ixList of Figures	xvList of Tables	1Chapter 1	Introduction	41.1	Interaction in 21st Century Digital Art	41.2	Interactive Art and Interface Design	51.3	Our Relationship with Electricity	51.4	Thesis Overview & Outline	7Chapter 2	Background	92.1	Electromagnetic Spectrum	92.2	The Artist Scientist	112.3	Circuit Bending & Hardware Hacking	122.3.1	Nicholas Collins – Hardware Hacking	132.3.2	Opportunistic Design and Exploratory Development	142.3.3	Designing for Hackability	142.4	Tapping into Electromagnetic Systems	142.4.1	Christina Kubisch	152.5	Exposing the Circuitry	182.5.1	Peter Blasser	192.5.2	Andrew McPherson	202.6	Digital Art and Glitch Art	202.7	Interactive Art and Interaction Design	212.8	Mechatronic Music	222.8.1	The Logos Foundation and Godfried-Willem Raes	232.8.2	Trimpin	242.8.3	The Machine Orchestra and The Machine Lab	25Chapter 3	Human-Circuit Interaction in the Gallery	273.1	Interaction Rail	283.1.1	Electrical Box – Installation Description	293.1.2	Approach to Interaction	303.2	Open Interaction	333.2.1	Cathode Ray Tubes - Installation Description	343.2.2	Interaction Design	353.3	Deception	363.3.1	Symbiotic SNES	363.3.2	6 * 9 = 42	373.4	Unwelcoming Spaces	383.4.1	No Humans Allowed - Installation Description	383.4.2	No Humans Allowed – Interaction Design	393.5	Non-Interactive	393.5.1	Digital Rain – Dynamic	403.5.2	Computer Music – Deterministic	413.6	Conclusion	43Chapter 4	Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCI	444.1	Philosophy for Hardware Development	454.2	Abstractive/Deconstruction	474.2.1	Discovery Synth: Project Overview	484.2.2	Buttons	494.2.3	Sliders	494.3	Camouflage and Exposure	524.3.1	Retrono – Design Approach	524.4	Re-Appropriation of Conventions	534.4.1	Modular SNES: Project Description	544.5	Deception	554.5.1	Symbiotic SNES: Project Description	554.5.2	Symbiotic SNES - Technical Details	574.5.3	“6 x 9 = 42” and the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot	584.5.4	CTSB – Interaction Design	594.6	Removing Agency	604.6.1	Eavesdropper	614.6.2	EavesDropper – Technical Description	624.7	Orchestrating Circuitry	644.7.1	The Voltage Slammer	644.7.2	OneToFour – Interface Description	674.8	Conclusion	68Chapter 5	Approaches to Human-Robot Performance	695.1	Mechatronic Entities	705.1.1	Mechatronic Instrument	705.1.2	Mechatronic Instrumentalist	715.1.3	Mechatronic Personality	715.1.4	Digital Co-Composer	725.2	The Pantheon Mechatronic System	725.2.1	Server	735.2.2	OSC	755.2.3	Shields	755.3	Mechatronic Instruments played by Humans	805.3.1	Robots Improvisational Jam	815.4	Non-Interactive Performances	815.4.1	Beatles	825.4.2	Hello Humans	835.4.3	Computer Music	835.5	Humans Interacting with Robots in Musical Performances	845.5.1	Robot Whispers - Performance Description	845.6	Mechatronic Personality Social Performances	855.6.1	Mechatronic Personalities	865.6.2	AntiSocial	875.6.3	Hedonism Bot	885.6.4	No Humans Allowed	895.7	Conclusion	90Chapter 6	Conclusion	916.1	Summary	916.2	Primary Contributions	916.3	Final Thoughts	92Bibliography	94
List of FiguresFigure 1: Thesis outline.	7Figure 2: The electromagnetic spectrum of energy.	9Figure 3: Self-portrait, 1512, on left; The Vitruvian Man, 1490, on right.	11Figure 4: Nicolas Collins’ Original Hacking Manual and Handmade Electronic Music.	13Figure 5: Christina Kubisch with one of the listening devices used on her Electrical Walks.	15Figure 6: Peter Blasser tuning his rollable synthesizer before a performance.	17Figure 7: Example "Paper Circuit" by Peter Blasser.	18Figure 8: Mechatronics is a blend of many disciplines.	21Figure 9: Godfried-Willem Raes with a portion of the Man and Machine robot orchestra.	22Figure 10: Trimpin with Sheng High in 2006.	23Figure 11: The Machine Orchestra on stage at the Walt Disney Music Hall.	24Figure 12: Required interaction for Electrical Box.	31Figure 13: EB spacial layout when installed in the WaveCave gallery at CalArts.	32Figure 14: One of the listening stations with two EavesDropper EM listening devices.	33Figure 15: Cathode Ray Tubes installation with three Retrono interfaces.	35Figure 16: Symbiotic SNES control flow.	37Figure 17: Digital Rain as presented during the 2015 Digital Arts Expo.	41Figure 18: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo.	42Figure 19: Discovery Synth musical interface in the fall of 2016.	48Figure 21: Second version of the Retrono Synthesizers.	53Figure 22: Modular SNES circuit bent video game console.	55Figure 23: Symbiotic SNES installed at the 2016 Bay Area Makers Faire.	56Figure 24: Early version of Symbiotic SNES hardware.	58Figure 25: Chroma Temporal Surveillance Bot interface, final design on right.	60Figure 26: Eavesdropper magnetic field listening device.	62Figure 27: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronics.	63Figure 28: EavesDropper electrical system diagram.	64Figure 29: The Voltage Slammer (v1) controlling a small ensemble of toys.	65Figure 30: The Voltage Slammer, second design.	66Figure 31: OneToFour installed in a private residence in 2016.	68Figure 32: The Pantheon Server initialization routine.	74Figure 33: Brigid six-channel actuator shield for the Arduino Uno.	77Figure 34: Circuit for a single Brigid, or Homados, actuator channel.	78Figure 35: Homados sixteen channel actuator shield for the Arduino Mega.	79Figure 36: Hermes four channel stepper motor Arduino Uno shield.	80Figure 37: Robots Improvisational Jam as performed in the Machine Lab at CalArts.	82Figure 38: Model-A (left) and Model-B (right) mechatronic personalities.	87Figure 39: Ivy Liu feeding  Hedonism Bot during a performance of Hedonism Bot.	89
List of TablesTable 1: The installations presented in this chapter and their approaches to interaction.	28Table 2: Possible interactions with the Retrono interfaces.	37Table 3: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities	46Table 4: Play modes supported by Symbiotic SNES.	57Table 5: Approaches to mechatronic preformance presented in this chapter.	71Table 6: How personality state changes effect the states of other personalities.	90Chapter 1 Introduction[NV1]I [NV2]am captivated by the power of the electromagnetic spectrum. I am fascinated at the different ways we have developed technology to harness, control, and leverage the awesome power of this spectrum. [NV3]Likewise, I love analyzing how we, as human beings, have constructed interfaces to interact with electrical systems. These personal interests are muses for many of the installations, interfaces, and performances presented in this document. Our societal and personal relationships with electricity are complex, strange, dynamic, and a constant topic of examination in my works.1.1 	Interaction in 21st Century Digital ArtThe Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society, the 1950 cybernetic text written by Norbert Weiner was the first publication which focused research onto human interaction.[1], [2]. Xxx[NV4] [3] xxx[NV5]. With the rise of computer technology and the internet, the field of interaction design further developed and flourished. [4] xxx[NV6] [5] Now, interaction in the gallery is common-place and no-longer in the avant-garde. [NV7]This thesis hopes to vitalize an interest in exploring different ways to create spaces and objects that facilitate interaction in new, or interesting ways. We are entering into a new epoch in which our interactions with technology are being fluently redefined. As our devices begin to answer back, makes sense about the world around them, drive you to work, and maintain small talk they are no longer simply inanimate tools but instead start to exhibit traces of intelligence. 1.2 Interactive Art and Interface Design       “art becomes interactive when audience participation is an integral part of the artwork. In making interactive art, the artist goes beyond considerations of how the work will look or sound to an observer. The way that it interacts with the audience is also a crucial part of its essence.”       Ernest Edmonds, Professor of Computation and Creative Media at the University of Technology in Sydney      Reference windows and mirrors specifically how they talk about interactive art, or digital art is inherently interface design.[6]      The fields of interactive art and interface design are closely intertwined.       Interactive Art is constantly redefining the role of the gallery visitor and the artwork. While sight and sound have been vitally important senses in galleries around the world, interactive art has added touch to the senses used in the gallery. The old gallery motto of “look but don’t touch” has been transformed in many galleries into “look and please touch”.[7] While the emotional and intellectual responses we have to art is fundamentally rooted in how effectively the art is able to elicit a response from us interactive art provides the artists with heightened opportunity. Interactive art, by definition, requires engagement from the audience.	      Another new consideration is the venue in which the work is presented. 1.3 Our Relationship with ElectricityIn 2016, it is rare that we find ourselves directly interacting with electronic circuitry: we are discouraged from attempting to repair our broken electronic devices by stickers, specialty hardware, and cautionary tales of electrocution from worried parents. When we need electricity to perform some task for us, we usually press a button, move a lever, or turn a knob that then mechanically operates on the circuit which is almost always hidden from view. This has been the norm since the introduction of electrical systems. This if with good reason as electrical energy has the capacity to harm us physically and even kill us.  Since the War of the Currents starting in the late 1890’s between Tesla and Edison, where public electrocutions of animals and pets were performed in the streets, electricity has been associated with danger and death to a large portion of the population.[8] 	There was once a time when anyone with common sense and a little electrical know-how would be able to crack open the case of their miss-behaving electronic device and be able to swiftly repair it with a few common components lying around the work bench. [NV8]Over time, the complexity of electronic devices has steadily been increasing while their relative size has decreased. The complexity of our modern gadgets has grown in complexity exceptionally since the mass production of electronic devices.[NV9][9] Without special training it is near impossible to fix a modern smart TV or a iPhone without specialized training. Even less byzantine devices, such as childrens toys, implement component integration and consolidation with nearly all electronic functionality packed onto one or two highly specialized IC’s. With these devices, the repair-ability, hack-ability, and tinker-ability is minimal. [NV10]      I believe one of the reasons for the status quo can be found in our relationship with electronic devices. [NV11]Practically, we are concerned with the result of electronic work instead of the electricity itself. For example, the traffic lights which conduct motor vehicle traffic with their colored lights are much more useful, and dangerous if malfunctioning, than the electrical arcs bursting out of a Tesla Coil: even though the Coil consumes orders of magnitude more electricity than the traffic lights.  Even in devices, such as the lightbulb, where electricity might seem to directly provide us with function, upon a closer examination it is revealed that the technology leverages the effects of electrical energy and not the energy itself. The light produced in the lightbulbs filament is the result of the heat produced by current flowing inside the bulb: not the electrical current itself.       Many of our common assumptions about human-circuit interaction would benefit from questioning, exploration, and discourse. As humans, once we figure out how to do something and it works good enough there can be little immediate incentive to further explore new avenues. [NV12]Many of the ways that we interact with electronic devices, especially in the art world, is based on old norms of expression and interaction that were established in the 20th century. Just like the QWERTY keyboard layout that is based on the mechanical limitations of typewriters and still persists in much of the English speaking western world, the work in this thesis hopes to provoke dialogue into the status-quo of human-circuit interaction in the fields of gallery art, mechatronic performance, and interface design.[NV13]1.4 Thesis Overview & OutlineFigure 1: Thesis outline.A background chapter which covers artists and movements that have incepted this body of work provides a framework for the rest of the chapters. Next, a variety of installations created by the author that each champion a different approach to user interaction in the gallery are presented in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 presents eight interfaces which approach interaction through different lenses of human-circuit interaction.  Chapter 5 first proposes terminology for discussing mechatronic instruments, then provides an overview of a modular hardware /software system for building mechatronic instruments, sculptures, and installations before outlining seven examples of mechatronic, or human-mechatronic, musical and extra-musical performance that each approach human-mechatronic interaction differently. 
Chapter 2 BackgroundThe installations, performances, and interfaces presented in this thesis are indebted to a variety of contemporary and past artists, movements, and ideas. This chapter presents a selection of the most significant inspirations during the creation of the corpus of work presented in this document. This chapter attempts to contextualize the work presented in the later chapters to help the reader orient themselves into the mind space of the author.2.1 Electromagnetic SpectrumFigure 2: The electromagnetic spectrum of energy.[NV14]The electromagnetic spectrum plays a key role in the work presented in the following chapters. Not only is electronic circuitry inescapably tied to the secrets of this broad band of energy, but many of the installations, and interfaces, were directly inspired by some aspect of this force. The electromagnetic spectrum encompasses the radio, microwave, inferred, visible light, ultraviolet, x-ray, gamma ray, and cosmic ray wavelengths. When mankind began to understand and harness the great power of electromagnetic energy our society entered into a new time, a new epoch. No longer were we bound by the limitations of mechanical tools and constructs. We, as a species, became liberated by the magnificent power of electronic technology. Since xxxx’s xxx of light in the xxxxx we have developed ways to leverage the properties and inherent energy of the entire electromagnetic spectrum. [NV15]From cameras and camcorders which are able to document and record the reflections of visible light around us, to medical X-Rays that allow doctors to diagnose physical ailments, to cell-phone towers that transmit radio waves connecting people from far corners of the globe our society relies on the powers of the electromagnetic spectrum for much of the worlds daily activity. The multitude of strategies for leveraging the EM spectrum, and the human ingenuity involved with their inceptions into societal knowledge, have spawned several of the installations, projects, and performances discussed in this document.2.2 The Artist ScientistFigure 3: Self-portrait, 1512, on left; The Vitruvian Man, 1490, on right.Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci was an Italian painter, inventor, engineer, writer, astronomer, mathematician, sculpture, and overall renaissance badass. Known as the father of paleontology1, ichnology2, and architecture Leonardo lived from April 15, 1452 to May 2, 1519. Da Vinci epitomized the renaissance humanist artist-scientist through his scientific and artistic pursuits. [NV16][10] Leonardo lived a multidiscipline life working in art, medicine, warfare, and science. Among his varied accomplishments Leonardo painted the Mona Lisa and the Last Supper; drew the Vitruvian Man; invented the anemometer3, the parachute, scuba gear as well as various robotic and mechanic wonders.4 All the while adhering to his principles as a logical being whom listens to the unavoidable wisdom of scientific evidence and method. [NV17]      Just like Leonardo, my heart and time has always been split between the logical and emotional pursuits.  My artistic pursuits dabble with electrical engineering, computer science, data science, mechanical engineering, information technology, digital fabrication, design, and physics and I like to consider myself a multi-disciplined creator. Leonardo’s worth ethic, determination, and open mindedness are source of strength in my own approach to art, research, design, and engineering. As we are in a technological renaissance in our epoch, it is apt now, more than ever, to follow Leonardo’s advice and apply saper vedere5 to our practice.[12][NV18]2.3 Circuit Bending & Hardware HackingThe circuit bending and hardware hacking communities were my introduction to electronics and interface design, due to their approach to interfacing with electronic devices and how their propinquity has guided my work. Circuit bending and hardware hacking are both strange, anti-social, punk, anarchistic pastimes that invite us to subvert the manufacturers intentions and “Void (OUR) Warranty”.[13, p. -] Often times these hobbies employ a knowledge-on-demand approach to electronics where one learns enough to be safe, have fun, and produce a working end product. The spirit of fun, play, exploration, and practical knowledge that hackers and benders identify are principles that are paramount to my artistic process and the work presented in this thesis.[14] [15]–[17][18]2.3.1 Nicholas Collins – Hardware HackingFigure 4: Nicolas Collins’ Original Hacking Manual and Handmade Electronic Music.Nicolas Collins, born in 1954 in New York City, is a pioneer in the use of microcomputers in live performance who makes extensive use of hacked and repurposed electronic devices as well as custom ‘home made’ circuitry. [NV19]In 2006 Nicolas published the book Handmade Electronic Music: The Art of Hardware Hacking which has been instrumental in my own development as a tech-artist as well as for scores of hackers, artists, and electricians. Nicolas currently holds the positions of editor-in-chief for the Leonardo Music Journal and chair for the sound department at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.[NV20]	Handmade Electronic Music6 was the single most influential text in the development of my artistic practice. As circuit bending taught me to be comfortable with exploring electronic circuits and being alright with not fully understanding my actions, the projects in Collins’ book introduced me to creativity and art in electronics.      Firmly rooted in the academic world, Nicolas’ book approached electronics differently than Reed Ghazala and the circuit benders7. [NV21]Projects such as xx and xxx in Handmade Electronic Music not only xx but xxxx. [NV22]2.3.2 Opportunistic Design and Exploratory DevelopmentOpportunistic design is a set of design and development practices which is common throughout varied fields as web programming, hardware hacking, industrial design, and art. [NV23]2.3.3 Designing for HackabilityHardware hacking and circuit bending both usually rely on the repurposing or reuse of preexisting electronic devices and/or components. While a few of the interfaces presented are modified preexisting electrical systems following the hardware hacking approach, the majority of the interfaces have been designed and built from the ground up. Among the approaches used when designing and building the interfaces is “Designing for Hackability” as proposed in the 2004 international conferences Designing Interactive Systems (DIS) by Anne Galloway, Jonah Brucker-Cohen, Lalya Gaye, Elizabeth Goodman, and Dan Hill in the paper with the same name.      Interfaces that are designed with Hackability as a tenant are customizable allowing the user to turn them into the device they want them to be. Hackable interfaces cultivate reciprocity between the designers, users, and the device itself. They embrace unanticipated use by being both transparent and robust.[19] Applying these principles to interface design is not new and many examples of interfaces with hackability can be seen from modular synthesizers to laptops. However, in the current age of hyper-normalization and increased technological literacy, a revitalized consumer desire for individuality and personalization is emerging. Hackability is one approach to fulfilling those desires and is important to investigate. [20]2.4 Tapping into Electromagnetic SystemsHardware Hacking and Circuit Bending are both inherently violent activities that tend to mutilate the original device: altering its capabilities, interactions, and even purpose. While that method is exemplified in several works presented in later chapters, and is a valid approach not all of the projects use those methods. A source of provocation and the catalyst for many projects has been Christina Kubisch’s work as an installation artist. Christiana’s installations empower visitors to listen to electronic circuitry with her custom magnetic flux sonification headphones. The headphones enact their magic from afar without any violence, obtrusiveness, or even physical contact and are a direct departure from the interactions found with circuit bent devices. Her interactions are introverted yet exploratory, covert and empowering.2.4.1 Christina KubischFigure 5: Christina Kubisch with one of the listening devices used on her Electrical Walks.Christina Kubisch (b 1948) studied electronic music at the Milan Conservatory of Music. She quickly became unsatisfied with the conventionality of the conservatories offered topics of study and she decided to enroll in the Technical University in Milan to take classes in electronics. In her own process of opportunistic design, as described in an interview for cabinet magazine, Christina stumbled upon what has become known as the Electrical Walks:“One day I bought a telephone amplifier, a little cube that you could put next to your telephone so that you could hear it without having the receiver in your hand. The cube was switched on, and when I came into the laboratory, it started to make really strange sounds in my handbag. I took it out and asked my professor what was going on. He explained to me that there were coils in this little cube, and that they picked up some of the machines in the room. It was like a flash in my mind. It was exactly at the time when I wanted to get away from performance and start producing installations.”      She goes on to explain how her excitement over the technology commanded her installation configurations.“In my early installations, there were people wandering around with these little cubes in their hands, walking along thick electrical cables that had sounds running through them. I didn’t think about using the sounds of the outside world. I had no idea about electricity in general or that it could make interesting sounds. I just used the system of electromagnetic induction as a way of amplifying musical sounds.”      After five years she started working with an Italian headphone manufacturing company and commissioned 20 custom headphones with her electromagnetic snooping technology installed inside of large soviet headphones. She made several installations showcasing the custom headphones but eventually the set deteriorated and the project was put on hold. Almost a decade later, she found a sponsor which helped develop the technology to create an improved system. In 1999, at the Potsdamer Platz8 in Berlin, the new system was used for the first time in the installation Forty Pillars and One Room located in a large parking garage. She wrapped lengths of cables covered in green phosphorescent paint around forty of the free standing pillars in the parking garage creating the trunks of trees as seen from underground. Each of the pillars emitted a different sequence of tones: with all of them sharing the common theme of water. The participants particular sonic experience is dependent on their position within the space and the specific time of day [21]. Forty Pillars and One Room interestingly uses electricity and concrete to create a world of implied nature. Christina created a sonic landscape in direct juxtaposition to the electrical and industrial materials she used for construction.      In 2004, Kubisch officially began exhibiting works which used the EM listening devices in public locations under the umbrella name of Electrical Walks9. The Electrical Walks, although closely related to her previous work with the listening devices, feature different source material and interactions than seen in her past work. Instead of planting composed electromagnetic signals in wiring that people listen to with her devices, Electrical Walks delegates the creation of sonic content to the environment. When researching a new walk, Kubisch embarks into an (usually) urban center with an EM listening device. She walks around the city and maps the magnetic activity. She uses the master map to create tours showing areas of sonic interest with routes that tour the cities magnetic features. The public receives copies of the routes along with her custom magnetic field listeners and are sent off to explore the environment at their own pace.       Christina Kubisch is of importance to the authors work due to how her approach to creating unique experiences for her gallery viewers has influenced the interactions and experiences the author attempts to create in his own work. Her carefully distilled and delicate treatment of technology and the electromagnetic spectrum has driven the author to design for simplicity and elegance in his own interfaces. Kubisch’s work creates intimate experiences that can be shared by many people at the same time. Technology is at the core of her work and is necessary to tell the narrative and impart the experience she is attempting to enforce. This fact is not shoved in the participants face, instead, her installations abstain from telling the interactee about the wonders at hand and simply give them enough information to navigate the worlds she presents. 2.5 Exposing the CircuitryFigure 6: Peter Blasser tuning his rollable synthesizer before a performance.Several of the interfaces discussed in this thesis seek to unveil electrical systems both physically and functionally10. The impulse to design electrical systems which interface directly with the bodies electrical properties has been acted upon by many designers and artists over the years. [NV24]From the early circuit bending technique of “Laying Hands”[22], where the bender licks his fingers and touches random parts of an exposed running circuit board to quickly determine active areas of the board, utilizing our bodies electrical properties to influence an electrical system has been in the repertoire of the resourceful tinker for decades. [NV25]2.5.1 Peter BlasserFigure 7: Example "Paper Circuit" by Peter Blasser.Peter Blasser, a graduate from the Oberlin College and Conservatory as well as one of Don Buchla’s apprentices, is an instrument builder, performer, and teacher. He develops instruments under the notion of “inner surface” in electronic sound production. These instruments involve unprotected circuits where performers are able to touch the circuitry directly. Blasser's idea of the “inner surface” is mirrored in the design of several of the interfaces discussed in later chapters. [23]        In a world dominated by rigid rules and equations, it is refreshing to enter into Blasser’s unique approach to circuit design. His paper circuits, point to point soldering, and capacitive interfaces are stunningly creative, unique, and functional. Personality dominates his creations as Peter constantly creates new, fun ways to build relationships with the electronic devices we build while subtly questioning the rigid conventions of electrical design. For example, approximately one third of the component values in his schematics are left to the discretion of the builder providing a range of values that could be used instead of a singular value. Blasser does this so each instrument is unique and that the creator of the instrument has a stronger personal bond to the instrument. The closer you look at a Blasser schematic the more you notice Peter’s quirky terminology: such as “harry caps” and “X” resistors. His circuits are intentionally unstable and unpredictable while being both reactive and generative. His electronic diagrams are hand drawn, often using his own symbols in place of industry conventions, according to the electronic effect the component might have on the sonic output of the device. This makes it easier for one to transverse the functionality of his circuitry, while imbuing a since of wonder and exploration when building one of his designs.      I had the pleasure of meeting Peter Blasser at a workshop at CalArts in 2015. Talking to Blasser about his approach to circuit design while building one of his Old Mr. Grassi synthesizers was instrumental in the development of my views on human-circuit interaction. The development of several of the projects presented in this document especially in terms of circuit design, user interaction, and relationship building. The experience helped me figure out ways to apply circuit bending techniques and approaches (which rely on a starting object to modify) to the design of new interfaces which are not built from the dissection, augmentation, or modification of a preexisting electrical system. 2.5.2 Andrew McPhersonxxx[NV26].xxx. talk about that one box thing that is designed for hackability.      While augmented instrument builders such as Andrew McPherson with the xxxxxx are explored designing devices with the intention of unpredictability, exploration, and hackability from the onset, McPherson, and others, designs tend to obscure the underlying circuitry and still require the user to use sensing technol.[24][NV27]Also what about the touchkeys? 2.6 Digital Art and Glitch ArtDigital technology and the rise of computer software has changed the art world forever. Computers and electronic devices has facilitated the rise of new artforms such as Internet Art, Digital Art, Glitch Art, and Interactive Art and has forever changed the workflow of many ‘conventional’ artists such as painters, photographers, sculpturs, archutects, and others. [5], [7], [25], [26] As Walter Benjerman observes in the seminal essay xxxx[NV28],  one problem with art in the age of technology and manufacturing is the loss of the artifact. Walter used the camera as an example arguing that if any number of prints can easily be reproduced where lies the art. One approach fo addressing this issue has been for artists to focus on the production of art. With interactive installation art, which most of the works presented in this corpus fall into that category, the artists are able to ensure that each participant has a unique exerperience with the installation. The uniqueness and personalized experience becomes the art in installation art. The art does not lie in a artifact, but instead in the experience. While this thesis presents both installations, interfaces, and performances as mediums there is only a singular artform that the artist works with: experience.[27]	xxx[NV29] Duchamp suggested that for art to be complete it relied on the viewer to both view it and interperate it. Interactive art not only requires ites viewers to view, and interperate it but it also demands that they become a part of the piece. For it is only when interactive art is being interfaced with does it becomes art by providing content or a context for its content. 2.7 Interactive Art and Interaction DesignAccording to Gillian Crampton Smith, the director of the Interaction Design Institute Ivrea[NV30], good interaction design consists of:• Reassuring Feedback – you know you are doing something when its being done.• Navigability – your ability to keep track of where you are in the system and how to get where you are going.• Consistency – a command in one part of the system will have the same effect as in all other parts of the system.These tenants are to facilitate what Smith describes as “Intuitive Interaction” which are interactions that minimalize the conscious thought needed to operate the system. While these design principles make good sense for devices such as computers, automobiles, televisions, and phones artists do not want to minimalize conscious thought.[4]2.8 Mechatronic Music[NV31]Figure 8: Mechatronics is a blend of many disciplines.Mechatronics i[NV32]s an interdisciplinary field by definition that blends, just to name a few, electrical engineering, computer science, and mechanical engineering to create robotic systems capable of performing a wide range of tasks from the mudain to the expressive. Mechatronic Music is concerned with the musical implications of mechatronic systems within the context of human-robot performance, robot performance, xxxx, and xxxx[NV33]. A few of the installations and a majority of the performances introduced in this paper utilize mechatronic instruments or are concerned with the creation of new mechatronic instruments or composing music for mechatronic performers. [NV34]This section does not provide a comprehensive overview of the history of mechatronics, nor does it mention scores of innovators in the field who have dedicated their lives to the creation of mechatronic entities, instead it aims to introduce the three most important influences on the authors work in the field.[NV35] The Logos Foundation, Trimpin, and the Machine Orchestra are introduced in chronological order according to the genesis of each of their work.2.8.1 The Logos Foundation and Godfried-Willem Raes Figure 9: Godfried-Willem Raes with a portion of the Man and Machine robot orchestra.Godfried-Willem Raes is the mastermind behind the Man and Machine robot orchestra at the Logos Foundation in Ghent, Belgium.[28] With the founding of the Logos Foundation in 1968 and their commitment to mechatronic instrument creation and composition in 1990 the Man and Machine orchestra is one of the oldest robotic orchestras in the world. His extensive orchestra of over fourty-five wind, string, percussion, and noise generating instruments are imbued with extensive character and care.[NV36]       With the Logos Foundation being foremost a collective of experimental composers and musicians Raes work is centered around writing music specifically to take advantage of the unique capabilities of their unique instruments. Being a concerned as much with the musical output of the machines as their aesthetic or technical qualities Raes is vitally important to my own work composing music for mechatronic ensembles in his adoption of experimental theatrical aspects to some of his performances. [NV37] Raes performs as a solo act, with the Logos duo11, the Logos ensemble12, and the Logos Robot Orchestra. [NV38]      Raes, his students, and collaborators do a thorough job documenting the process of design and construction of many of the instruments that make up the Man and Machine Robot Orchestra. Raes takes notes of what is accomplished for the project on each day it is worked on and freely publishes the information along with pictures on the Logos Foundation’syt7ds…….. website. These valuable notes even contain information about what books and/or websites were used to research various bits of information such as saxophone fingering diagrams. [NV39]2.8.2 TrimpinFigure 10: Trimpin with Sheng High in 2006.Trimpin is a kinesthetic sculptor, mechatronic inventor, and installation artist based out of Seattle, Washington. He approaches installation art as both a visual artist and as a musician. His work creates music that’s rigorously composed, playful, exciting, and upheld to the highest visual standards. Trimpin often employs the tactic of building multitudes of a single object that are similar yet slightly different. This is used to great effect in installations such as Klompen (1990), Conloninpurple (1997), and Sheng High (2006). Unlike artists such as Zimoun, whose installations employ vast multitudes of identical objects which create emergent complexity due to their numbers and not their differences, Trimpin’s multiples tend to be unique. For instance, in Sheng High each of the mechanisms is tuned to a different note and the composition could not be realized without each and every device.       Throughout his impactful career, he has maintained his personality, ethics, morals, and artistic integrity through in his work and actions. He is humble and always willing to teach the wonders of mechanical art to anyone with an open soul. [NV40]Trimpin has guided my work building the mechatronic personalities introduced in Chapter 3 and has been a deeply valued mentor throughout my studies at CalArts.[29][NV41]2.8.3 The Machine Orchestra and The Machine LabFigure 11: The Machine Orchestra on stage at the Walt Disney Music Hall.[NV42]The California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) Machine Lab is the hub of the Music Technology department as well as the Digital Arts Minor. Besides being the technological core of the institute, the Machine Lab is home to the nine mechatronic instruments that make up the Machine Orchestra.[30]–[32]   The Machine Orchestra is a mixed ensemble of  human and robotic performers that  combines the musical elements of a laptop ensemble with  the acoustic affordances of robotic instruments. Over the past four years, I have gotten to know the different instruments in the Machine Lab through hours spent repairing, maintaining, upgrading, and writing music for the robots.       Nine mechatronic musical instruments inhabit the Machine Lab at CalArts. BreakBot is a hanging percussion instrument that features a kick drum, a crash cymbal, and a snare13  [33]. Spread throughout the entire room, hidden in the ceiling grid, are twenty Clappers: each consisting of a single solenoid, with a blue LED inside of a ping-pong ball. MalletOTon is a mechatronic marimba that features 48 rotary solenoid actuated rubber headed mallets striking its keys  [31]. StringThing is made up of three steel strings picked by DC motors with plectrum mechanisms as well as steel post dampener mechanisms activated by solenoids. RattleTron is a percussion instrument that includes an assortment of hand percussion instruments along with three pipes struck with solenoids. MahaDeviBot is an Indian percussion robot that consists of a total of twelve solenoid actuators that strike frame drums, gongs, bells, wood blocks, and finger cymbals. GanaPatiBot is a percussion robot that features five plastic drums of various sizes each with multiple solenoid powered beaters. Lydia is a standup piano with twenty solenoids that strike the strings percussively, sixteen DC motors which ring the strings via custom rubber strikers, and a hacksaw which is sawing through a large steel bolt at the base of the instrument.  JackBox is both a percussion and string instrument which features twelve guitar and bass strings, three cymbals, eleven German beer glasses, an eight key xylophone, and three plastic drums which are all activated using dozens of solenoids14. Tammy consists of six brass bells struck with steel posts and six custom cut wooden keys directly actuated by solenoid plungers  [33].      The Machine Orchestra was my introduction into mechatronics and robotic instrument performance and is responsible for my interest in human-robot interaction.[NV43]
Chapter 3 Human-Circuit Interaction in the GalleryIn this chapter, several of the authors installations are presented in terms of their approach to human-circuit interaction in the gallery.  The first section, Interaction Rail, presents Electrical Box as an installation which guides participants through a series of sequential interactions. Next, Open Interaction presents Cathode Ray Tubes as an installation that creates an interaction structure that is simple, open, flexible, and branching. The Deception section discusses Symbiotic SNES as a project that revisions familiar interfaces and games through the manipulation of control messages and 6 * 9 = 42 as a system that misuses data to publically label users without their knowledge. Next, No Humans Allowed is presented as an example of a hostile environment that discourages interaction in the Unwelcoming Spaces section. This chapter concludes with the Non-Interactive section where Computer Music and Digital Rain are presented as two example installations where interactivity is nonexistent.InstallationInterfaceMeans for Gallery InteractionApproach to Human-Circuit InteractionElectrical BoxEavesDroppersInteraction rail, specific requirements, linearObservational, extension of bodyCathode Ray TubesRetronosOpen, branching, non-linearDirect contactNo Humans AllowedNoneUnwelcoming environment, presence discouragedObservational, frictionComputer MusicNoneNoneObservationalChroma Temporal Surveillance BotSurveillance BotOpen, branching, non-linear, deceptionTypical, sinisterSymbiotic SNESSymbiotic SNESGame, deceptionRe-appropriatedDigital RainNoneNoneObservational15Table 1: The installations presented in this chapter and their approaches to interaction. 3.1 Interaction RailThe terminology “Interaction Rail” was invented by the author to describe situations where an interactee encounters multiple interactions which must be executed in a specific order without the option for deviation. The term is inspired by rail shooters a genera of action video games design where the player has no control over the majority of the movement their avatar makes, and is unable to freely explore the game environment.16 [NV44]An example of an interaction rail outside the context of gallery art would be the financial transactions that use a credit card chip reader. In order to pay for the goods, the customer must complete the interaction rail in order they must:1. Insert card into chip reader.2. Confirm that the amount is ok.3. Sign for the Purchase4. Remove the card from the chip-reader.If they skipped one of these steps, or attempted to perform any step out of order, the purchase will be rendered void.       Unsurprisingly, installations that use these configurations can be risky in terms of ensuring the participant follows the rail. If a visitor skips one of the steps in the rail, they are unable to continue and will not experience the installation as intended. Installations that require sequential interaction thus need to guide participants along the rail: either with explicate written, or symbolic, instructions or through subtler means. In this section, the installation Electrical Box is introduced as an example of an installation that attempts to guide participants through an interaction rail without the use of explicate written or symbolic directions. 3.1.1 Electrical BoxFigure: Electrical Box as seen in the WaveCave gallery from September 9th through September 19th, 2016.Electrical Box presents a silent room ordained with over 1000’ of instrument cables hanging from the rigging grid. Small, Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) flicker at the ends of the cables suspended in air. Several pairs of headphones hang on the walls in the far corners of the gallery. Viewers are expected to walk to the end of the room and put on the headphones along with the attached metal tins. At first, participants only hear faint static but after walking along the hanging cables, radio broadcasts can be heard emanating from the cables. The tins are able to listen to the sampling of radio stations and radio-static being projected through the gallery. The visitor is able to explore the electromagnetic energy which was silent when entering the gallery that is now permeating the space. 3.1.2 Approach to InteractionFigure 12: Required interaction for Electrical Box.Electrical Box attempts to guide visitors through a singular interaction rail17. In an attempt to avoid presenting, explicate written or symbolic instructions for how to interact with the installation, several subtler methods were used to encourage gallery viewers to stay on track. This included minimal signage, the strategic placement of open space, lighting, installation hardware, and strategic interface design.      The signage for Electrical Box is designed to function as clues for visitor to discern portions of the interaction rail. The simple sign outside of the gallery only discloses the name of the installation and that the installation is ‘electro-magnetic’ and ‘interactive’. Each portion of information disclosed in the sign was essential for helping a visitor to decouple to interaction. Electromagnetism informs visitors to the underling physics behind the installation while also promoting an aura of danger and scientific adventure. The word “interactive” on the sign informs the visitor of the participatory nature of the installation18. Putting visitors into the mindset of participants, building an expectation for having to participate19. As the headphones are attached to the eavesdroppers and no audio is generally head when they are donned, the knowledge that the space is interactive helps the participant to use the eavesdroppers on the cables hanging in the space.Figure 13: EB spacial layout when installed in the WaveCave gallery at CalArts.      Although the installation utilizes over 1000’ feet of cable, 35% of the gallery is designated as free space. EB’s empty space functions in two ways: by creating a boarder and by creating viewing posts. The entire outside rows and columns of the grid (the frame) is left void of cables. The frame encourages viewers to enter into the space, approach the headphones, and to explore the room20.  The frame functions as a walkway around the installation; helping guide viewers though the interaction rail while softening the transition into the gallery by allowing intermediate commitment to the space.  In addition to frame, EB also features a total of nine listening ports which each allow gallery viewers to stand, un-harassed by hanging cables, amidst the installation.21 These prime locations made it easier to listen to a variety of signals simply by spinning in a circle.  The listening posts gave people a place to go once they have discovered the listening devices providing destinations within the gallery: creating increasingly engaging experience.Figure 14: One of the listening stations with two EavesDropper EM listening devices.3.1.2.1 Lighting"A painter should begin every canvas with a wash of black, because all things in nature are dark except where exposed by the light."  -- Leonardo da Vinci“I will love the light for it shows me the way, yet I will endure the darkness for it shows me the stars.” -- Og MandinoThe approach to lighting in EB is as Mandino foreshadows, a tool to show people the way, to guide viewers along the rail. EB has three sources of light that participants are exposed to once they enter into the space: the cable LED’s, the door light, and the flood-lights. This sections discusses how each of these luminance sources were leveraged to guide the viewer to the interaction rail.      At the terminus of each of the cables are white LED’s that mirror the audio signal being transmitted through the cables. These LED’s are the primary visual draw to most visitors due to their flickering and relative brightness in the dim room. As indicated in figure 12, seven LEDs are concentrated in the rear of the installation. The remaining nine LED’s are distributed through the rest of the space, leaving a single row buffer between the formation in the rear and the foreground. The formation of LEDs in the rear created a visual focal point which encouraged folks to enter the space and walk to the rear of the room22. When the doors to the WaveCave are opened, the gallery is flooded with outside luminescence while the large glass doors took upwards to eight seconds to close. Once visitors enter the gallery, the slow closing of the doors and their descent into relative darkness provides a useful transition into the installation. Its eases the shock of the eyes adjusting to the darkness and overall smooths the transition into the space. The final source of light for EB comes in the form of dim spot lights that are directed to the corners of the room where the headphones and EavesDroppers are resting on their glass corner shelves. The spot lights are not bright enough to drastically change the overall ambience of the space, but do provide enough illumination to focus attention on the headphones.233.2 Open InteractionThis approach to interaction design provides multiple ways to effect the installation while refraining from establishing a hierarchy of value over the varied interaction options. This approach seeks to create a rewarding experience for both participants that are willing to spend the time to fully explore the capabilities of the space as well as the wallflower that is uncomfortable touching things in front of strangers. Cathode Ray Tubes is presented as an installation that follows this approach and is designed to create a hyper-reactive environment which facilitates a multitude of possible interactions.3.2.1 Cathode Ray Tubes Figure 15: Cathode Ray Tubes installation with three Retrono interfaces.Cathode Ray Tubes24 creates a video feedback loop out of four cathode ray tube (CRT) televisions (TVs) and four modern knock-offs of the Nintendo Entertainment System video game consoles which have been slightly modified (Retrono). The Retrono interfaces are sensitive to both changes in the electromagnetic field that surrounds them making them vulnerable to our bodies electrical properties. The Retronos, with no game cartridge inserted, produce the varied and evolving visuals seen in figure 15. The CRT TVs that each unit is placed in front of creates a strong electro-magnetic field which functions as an input stimulus to keep the Retronos in a state of flux. Changes in the visual output of the TVs result in corresponding changes in the EM field surrounding the Retrono units creating a feedback loop between each of the Retronos and its TV. The installation presents a broad electrical system with many different optional interaction modalities and does not favor one interaction with its technology but instead passively encourages folks to participate in whatever manner they are comfortable with.3.2.2 Interaction DesignThe video and audio synthesized by the Retrono devices can be affected by gallery goers in many different ways:• By standing within 3 feet of any of the interfaces the gallery viewers own electromagnetic field effects the output of the synths.• By waving a hand over the device, this effects are more profound.• By touching the devices users have more agency over the resulting synthesis• By moving a box, repositioning it in relation to its TV will change the result.• By touching multiple boxes at one time the results change. • People touching people touching boxes will result in different effects.Nothing in the gallery values one form of interaction over another and the experience of interaction is designed to be one of discovery. The desired interaction is both none and all of the bullet points presented above. It is most important that the viewer discovers their own unique relationship with the space and the artifacts and is able to forge their own backstory and explanation of the space. InteractionCommitmentEffect SeverityExample ResultNoneNoneMildScreens will slowly oscillate as the feedback look is only source of input.Stand within 3’ of unitMildMild-MediumThe unit will visually react to your presence.Wave hand over Retrono or TVMediumMediumThe unit will immediately visually and sonically react to your presence immediately.Touch a RetronoFullMajorThe unit will immediately visually and sonically react to your presence. You will have more control over the effect.Touch multiple Retronos at onceTotalMajorBoth units will immediately visually and sonically react to your presence. Table 2: Possible interactions with the Retrono interfaces.3.3 DeceptionUsually, when creating interactive installation art one of the fundamental tenants is to facilitate scenarios that are reactive to the actions of the interactee. If a guest pulls a lever, pushes a button or somehow interacts with the installation it is often desirable that the visitor understands how their presence effects the installation and feels empowered and impactful. The two installations presented in this that each attempt to deceive their participants in different ways. Symbiotic SNES presents a familiar interface that behaves in unexpected ways while 6 * 9 = 42 hides its true motives from the participant.[NV45]3.3.1 Symbiotic SNESFigure 16: Symbiotic SNES control flow.Symbiotic SNES (SSNES) is an interactive installation where two visitors at a time are able to play the video game Super Mario Brothers on a Super Nintendo Entertainment System in a completely new way. Two unmodified SNES controllers which are plugged into a SSNES device which is then plugged into the SNES console. When participants start to play the familiar video game the subversive nature of the SSNES hardware reveals itself. The SSNES device intercepts controller messages from the two players and performs a bitwise && operation on the controller data before sending the resulting controller message to the console. The result is a truly co-operative gaming experience as both of the players have to work together to control Mario, the in game character, on his adventures. Mario is unable to move around the digital world unless the two players coordinate their button presses. The bitwise operation only allows button presses that are occurring on both controllers to be passed to the console.       This installation could have easily been designed for any 16-bit era, or earlier, console and could have featured any game made for the chosen console, but the SNES and Super Mario Brothers were chosen for their broad nostalgic appeal. The SNES console was the most popular video game console of the 16-bit era, despite its late-coming into the game, and its controller is easy to understand, readily recognizable.[34] SSNES presents a video game console and accompanying video game that is nostalgic and vary familiar to a large portion of the population that grew up in my generation.[35] Many, many people have played the Super Mario Brothers game and think they know how the controllers will behave. This installation seeks to disrupt these familiar interactions with the intention of creating a new way to interact with the game.3.3.2 6 * 9 = 42According to The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy book series, 42 is “the answer to the ultimate question of life, the universe, and everything” as calculated over 7.5 million years by the mammoth supercomputer Deep Thought. When faced with the answer to the ultimate question, the beings whom constructed Deep Thought realized they did not know what the ultimate question actually is. Thus the beings built a second ever more powerful supercomputer, which is the size of a planet, to calculate the question. After millions of years the program came to an end and the new supercomputer revealed that the ultimate question is “What do you get when you multiply six by nine?”. The aliens were baffled.[36]       6 * 9 = 42 seeks to bring the deceptive nature of data into the light and provides a critique of the impulse of data scientist, and analysts, to draw lofty conclusions from misrepresentative, or incomplete, data sets. [NV46] The installation presents an iMac computer with no keyboard or mouse but instead a custom interface that looks like an unpainted guitar pedal with one button and a single knob. As a gallery viewer approaches they are able to see a temporally distorted video feed of their actions. By pressing the button and turning the knob they can modify the underlying slit-scan algorithm. After they are satisfied with the experience they leave to go on with the day. Unknown to the participant the underlying algorithm: the Chroma Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) has a more sinister agenda. Ten percent of the button presses will cause the program to perform a “random profiling” of its user. The program saves the currently displayed frame, performs a chroma analysis25 and based on the results assign a political orientation to the interactee. The program then proceeds to tweet the image along with a proclamation of political orientation. None of this activity is explicitly told to the user who only experiences a temporarily dropped framerate. In fact, the user has to use their computer, or smart device, to visit the CTSB twitter page to get any idea of the programs secret agenda. 3.4 Unwelcoming SpacesIf the definition of an interactive installation is only realizable with the agency of a visitor: I propose that an anti-interactive installation is an installation that when observed by a visitor loses its facilities and ceases to function. No Humans Allowed’s (NHA) mechatronic personalities do everything in their power to encourage visitors to leave and attempt to create an uncomfortable, unnerving hostile environment. NHA is an example of a circuit-centric interaction architecture. NHA’s mechatronic personalities react with aggression or silence with the presence of a human. In the since that the installation is in its most active state when no-one is present to observe the system I am presenting NHA as an anti-interactive installation.3.4.1 No Humans AllowedNHA creates a community of mechatronic personalities that reside in the “gated” WaveCave community. The personalities are xenophobic: reacting to outsiders via paralysis or violence. When the presence of a human is detected, the community breaks down and no longer functions harmoniously. The result is a hostile space that outsiders are not able to enter without being either attacked or shunned by the society residing within. Each of the six mechatronic sound sculptures (personalities) are constructed from extruded aluminum, acrylic, ultrasonic rangefinders, solenoids, DC motors and LED’s. The personalities are either hanging from the grid or resting on the floor depending on their size and construction. The ultrasonic rangefinders allow each personality to detect the presence of gallery viewers who will affect their behavior. When no outside presence is detected, all members of the community are alive, active, and productive. The presence of a human or ‘other’ disrupts the community. If the outsider gets too close to any specific sculpture, the personality will either become paralyzed by hate and fear (turn off) or will attempt to “violently” deter the intruder (loud, abrupt, a-rhythmic noises). Either way, the personality will be preoccupied by the presence of the ‘other’ it will no longer contribute to the community as a whole, disrupting the harmony of society. No Humans Allowed hopes to shine light on the danger of xenophobic ‘other’ thinking that is becoming more and more common in the UK with Brexit and the United States with the election of Trump. With the rise of mechatronics, robots, AI the question of AI morality is becoming a topic of discussion in more and more circles. Do we want our robotic children to exhibit violent, isolationist, bigoted tendencies or do we want them to be accepting, loving and caring to all other forms of live and intelligence?[NV47]      Three of the robotic personalities are standing sculpture constructed out of 80/20 extruded aluminum beams, three different banks of 6 solenoids and four stepper motors. The other three personalities are motor mobiles: the top is two pieces of clear acrylic cut in a circle. An onboard Arduino controls six 5V 3200rpm DC motors that each have a white LED soldered between its two leads. The gallery consists of three pair of personalities with each pair containing one mobile and one standing sculpture. When no ‘other’ is detected in the proximity of the sculptures the standing and hanging personalities chirp in unison, each solenoid triggering is mirrored by a motor twitching in the hanging personality.  However, as soon as someone is detected the link between the two is broken as the more aggressive standing sculpture attempts to deter the invader while the hanging personality Is too paralyzed by fear and hatred to do anything.3.4.2 No Humans Allowed – Interaction DesignNHA discourages interaction with the robots. Ultrasonic rangefinders are used to determine the presence of outsiders and if someone is present in the room the personalities will start to shut down, no longer performing for the gallery goer. If someone ventures too close to one of the personalities, they become aggressive and do anything in their power to scare the viewer away. This is the opposite of the other installations which invite interaction and encourage people to interact with the environment to forge a relationship with the space.3.5 Non-InteractiveThis section looks at two different approaches to creating installation art that is non-interactive. Digital Rain is a dynamic installation whose activity is determined by the current weather patterns from across the United States of America. The second example, Computer Music, is a static installation where an ensemble of mechatronic instruments perform a composition for eight-hours throughout the day. 3.5.1 Digital Rain – DynamicIn the 21st century, it is nearly impossible to avoid digital technology in the day-to-day grind. The work discussed in this thesis seeks to re-open the discussion of how we interact with electrical systems on the most fundamental way. It hopes to invite participants to ask how their bodies electrical properties coexist and affect the electromagnetic devices that are vital to modern life. The goal of the art presented in this thesis is to invite us to question how we interact not only with electrical systems and digital devices, but with everyone and everything in the world around us. I hope to present these interactive scenarios in a manner where people are empowered to discover the experience themselves and to look for new ways to interact with the world around them in a broad sense.Figure 17: Digital Rain as presented during the 2015 Digital Arts Expo.      Digital Rain is a data driven art installation, examining the crossroads of algorithmic and generative music, emergence patterns, data sonification, and technology driven systems of expression. 192 electromagnetic relay switches are arranged in a grid and mounted onto a wall. The relays are orchestrated by six Arduino Mega’s which are networked together and controlled by a hidden host computer. Weather conditions from a randomly selected meteorological station on the globe is collected by a Python script. A text-to-speech program announces the location and selected aspects of the weather report through a speaker that sits in front of the installation. Meta conditions (sunny, rain, etc.) select the base composition algorithm while the performance specifics are a factor of the forecasts wind speed, humidity, temperature and pressure. Digital Rain utilizes the mechanical ticking of the relays switching as the sonic source material for the piece. The relays, because of their precision and speed, are able to actuate fast enough to produce sustained pitch. This in addition to their idiosyncratic rhythmic snaps allows for us to create a wide variety of soundscapes. When the generative composition comes to a close, the system resets and a new station is polled.3.5.1.1 Approach to ActuationThis installation attempted to directly sonify weather conditions through the use of electromagnetic relay switches. The playback speed of the sonification was mapped to the temperature of the current station: with a slower playback when the weather is cooler. The humidity dictated the density of notes, with a higher humidity resulting in more per minute. The installation cycles through stations at a steady pace, only lingering on a single station for more than a minute if networking errors occur. This is to bring to light the dynamic, reactive nature of the installation. 3.5.2 Computer Music – DeterministicFigure 18: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo.Computer Music is an installation that is not affected by any outside persuasion. The mechatronic ensemble of floppy disk drives(FDD), hard disk drives (HDD), stepper motors, and CD-ROM drives are controlled by four Arduino Uno microcontrollers. A Python26 script listens to MIDI traveling through an internal virtual bus. For Computer Music, the composition was written in Ableton Live but the configuration allows any program or programming language capable of outputting MIDI messages to control the mechatronic ensemble. The FDD’s and CDROMs were pitched and able to be addressed with corresponding MIDI note numbers. The HDD spindles were continuously spinning throughout the composition while the stepper motors raised and lowered their top case both visually exposing the spinning disk below and sonically providing a filtered white noise. Lastly, the treys of the CD-ROMs were able to be opened both for their theatrical effect and awkward sound.       One thing that sets Computer Music apart from other approaches to mechatronic instruments is the fact that the original housings for the motors are maintained. Additionally, usually with mechatronic instruments the motors and actuators are used to trigger some sort of musical instrument be it a membrane or a string. Computer music literally amplifies the sounds of the motors themselves as the primary sonic material instead of the physical work done by the motor. Luckily for me, there has been extensive work done in the field of making music from Floppies, HDD’s and CD-ROM drives and I simply had to find the information and implement it. The excellent Arduino library Moppy, written and developed by the programmer SammyIAm, provides an easy to use interface for playing MIDI notes on floppy drives.[37] I was able to create a new internal MIDI bus on my Mac and pipe MIDI messages from Ableton Live to Moppy which in turn controlled the Floppy Drives.      Floppy drives take a four pin power connector that consists of one 12V, one 5V and two GND wires. This is the same pin configuration that is used by the old-school Molex connectors that all HDD’s and CD-ROM drives utilized in the early 2000’s.[38] I grabbed an old computer power supply I had lying about and a perfboard and created three long rails for my two power connections and my ground to which I connected six floppy drives. I built custom connectors and jumpers to fool the floppies into thinking they are connected to a computer and the fun began. 3.5.2.1 Approach to Non-InteractionWithout an interactive element, or any indeterminacy due to external factors, this approach gives absolute control over the outcome of the installation. As the piece involved the playback of a composition that was written especially for the mechatronics, as with most classical music, with no room for interpretation. The only variance one experiences are dependent on the time in which they come to visit the installation. This installation takes a deterministic approach to non-interactive installation art in the same way that a looping video projected on a wall does. The video remains static, its contents do not change and if someone stays in the gallery long enough they will see the entire thing. In the same manner the composition Computer Music does not change and the mechatronic performance of that composition does not change from one instance to another: if someone stays in the gallery for long enough they will hear the entire piece.3.6 ConclusionThis chapter presented five different approaches to interactivity, with example installations, for gallery installation art. Electrical Box in the Interaction Rails section created a complex set of interactions that must be executed sequentially. Open Interaction showed Cathode Ray Tubes as an installation that presented a highly reactive system that could be interfaced with in a variety of ways: all with equal validity. Deception talked about installations that attempted to deceive users by either re-appropriating familiar interfaces, Symbiotic SNES, or by disguising their true intentions, 6 * 9 = 42. Unwelcoming Spaces looked at No Humans Allowed as an installation that creates an aware space which is hostile to gallery viewers and discourage interaction. Non-Interactive looked at using both deterministic and dynamic approach’s to creating interesting non-interactive mechatronic installations with Computer Music and Digital Rain respectively.  Collectively these installations are the authors attempt to question how we interact with electronic devices in the art gallery and explore possible interaction frameworks for creating new interactive art.Chapter 4 Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCIIt is important for designers and builders of computer applications to understand the history of transparency so that they can understand that they have a choice.[6, p. 31][NV48]This chapter discusses several interfaces the author built throughout his graduate studies at CalArts. Each of the interfaces were created with a different approach to human-circuit interaction and are thus presented in this chapter in terms of how they address human-circuit interaction.  Although they differ in their controls and design, each of the interfaces discussed were built following the authors philosophy to hardware development which facilitates discovery and exploration. Some of the devices presented, such as the Discovery Synth, tackle interaction by removing physical abstractions that separate our bodies from the circuitry. Approaches that bypass the controls of preexisting electrical systems and insert a puppeteer that controls multiple ‘puppet’ devices are presented with the Voltage Slammer and Toys projects. Techniques that involves the interception and manipulation of control data is discussed with the Synergetic SNES and 4-to-1 projects. The Retrono interfaces are discussed as examples utilizing subtractive manipulation techniques to expose systems to the direct interactions seen with the Discovery Synth project. Project NameType of ProjectConvention AddressedApproach To Interface DesignHCIMHCIM NatureDiscovery SynthSynthesizer/InstallationButton/Pot AbstractionsSimplificationDirectInjectiveVoltage SlammerSequencer/Installation/Circuit Bending ToolObject interactionAbstractionAbstractedInjectiveModular SNESCircuit Bent Video Game Console / InstallationExpectationsSubversive Injection and redirectionAbstractedSubversive and InjectiveSynergetic SNESInstallationCo-operative gamingComplicationInterjectedSubversiveRetronoVideo Synthesizer/InstallationObject interactionBypassing interface, simplificationDirectInjectiveEavesdropperSuper-Human Powers/InstallationAgency SimplificationDirectInvestigatoryTable 3: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities4.1 Philosophy for Hardware DevelopmentThe authors approach for developing the hardware and software used in the installations, interfaces, and performances presented in this document is relatively consistent. The work first begins with a research phase. This is when the goal is to learn as much about the low-level technology as possible. Without worry about creating something fully functional, this step begins with a few weeks digging deep into the topic both theoretically, by reading about the technology, as well as physically, by building prototypes and conducting experiments. The mechanisms are approached from the lowest level and only after spending enough time on the lower level to feel comfortable does the project then work upwards.        For instance, when learning how to design and manufacture printed circuit boards, I spent many months experimenting with etching my own copper clad utilizing various DIY27 and hobbyist approaches before I learned proper circuit design using EAGLE CAD and PCB28 fabrication houses.  When the low level experimental prototypes fail and I understand the reasons why; I allow myself to take a step back and to see if anything can be done to simplify the project.  I repeat this process over and over again until I am confident in my chosen approach: completing my research phase. Next I begin the development process.  Incorporating aesthetics, I start developing a production design that both functions as intended and looks good applying everything learned from early models.       Akin to the idea of Speculative Design that seeks to muse on the possibilities of what could be, many of the projects in this corpus exercises an approach of exploratory design which seeks to follow inspirations and hunches during the prototyping phase.[39] Design is usually a field that is associated with solving problems and creating objects or images that are inviting, easy to use, and pleasing. The work introduced in this document, however, is more interested in creating problems for the uses and creating situations that cause us to question our environment and relationships with electronic devices.[39]4.2 Abstractive/DeconstructionFigure 19: Discovery Synth musical interface in the fall of 2016.This section introduces the Discovery Synth (DS) as an example of a musical interface that applies techniques of deconstructivism and abstraction to interface design. Buttons and potentiometers are designed from scratch in a way that integrates the human body as the mechanical portion of the device. The interface seeks to eliminate any unnecessary mechanical abstractions that separate our bodies from the electronics.       Electricity, in its raw form, is of little use to our society. Lightning arching in rainclouds, or striking the ground, does little to ease the struggle of human existence in the daily grind. However, electricity can work miracles when harnessed using the correct tools. The power of electricity, in modern society, originates in the design and construction of electronic devices and components which are able to focus the physics of electromagnetic energy to accomplish specific tasks. As a result, we usually interact with electricity via a physical abstraction or a tool. For instance, when you press the popcorn button on the microwave, the button physically separates your finger from the electronics that operate the microwave. The button, when pressed, connects two points in the circuitry which creates a connection between parts of the electronics that were not connected before. This connection causes electrons to flow which alerts the microwaves logic to the fact that the popcorn button was pressed. The DS project seeks to remove physical constructs that separate our bodies from the electricity which controls the electronic device we are using.4.2.1 Discovery Synth: Project OverviewThe DS is a Raspberry Pi powered interface that has been used in both installation and experimental music performance. It features eight custom designed buttons along with sixteen voltage dividers: eight of which are standard mechanical potentiometers while the other eight are custom designed for the DS. The instrument was crafted from reclaimed materials: the buttons and pots were housed in an old lamp casing, the main body was crafted out of wood found on the side of the road, and the ‘tuning’ pegs were salvaged from an old guitar. Inside the wooden housing, a Raspberry Pi with a custom cape which allows the device to read its twenty-four sliders, pots, and buttons can be found. 	The Raspberry Pi 2 features twenty-six General Purpose In/Out (GPIO) pins that can be used as either inputs or outputs at a logic level of 3.3V.[40] While these GPIO pins are adequate for many circuits, they are somewhat limited both by the fact that they are digital (not analog) and can only source minimal current. The Discovery Synth Cape29 gives the Raspberry Pi input/output capabilities that reflect those of an Arduino or similar microcontroller: bestowing the ability to read analog values from sensors. This is done with two MCP3008 8-channel 10-bit A/D converters which are used to read the sixteen voltage dividers found on the interface. Circuitry for twelve buttons, two LEDs, and a LCD monitor is provided by the cape in addition to the A/D converters. 	For the software, the discovery synth primarily uses Pure Data[41] both as the audio/video synthesis engine and to read values from the buttons, pots, and sliders. The DS and designed for the CalArts AV Ensemble and each of the ensemble members built their own version of the DS. Students were free to choose whatever specific components, enclosures, and configurations they preferred for their instrument. As long as the final instrument contained at least sixteen voltage dividers and eight buttons people were free to individualize their interface as their saw fit. My interface used conventional potentiometers for eight of the voltage dividers but the other eight voltage dividers and all eight buttons were built from scratch from raw materials.4.2.2  ButtonsThe buttons constructed for the DS have no physical mechanism that separates the action of pressing from the flow of electrical current. Every part of the design is functional and vitally important for the device to work properly. The process started by distilling how Normally Open (NO) electro-mechanical push buttons function. NO buttons internally contain two conductive paths which are electronically separated from each other when no external force is applied to the button. When the button is activated30, the two parts of the circuit are joined through mechanical means to temporarily allow current flow from one path to another.        The DS’s buttons follow the NO model: providing no electrical connection in the resting state and allowing current to flow through the buttons when the button is activated. However, the buttons require the electrical current to flow through its user’s skin; as the player becomes part of the circuitry. This is accomplished with two conductive bolts spaced a few millimeters apart and bolted into the top of the interface. One of the bolts is connected to the 3.3v power rail provided while the other bolt is being monitored by a GPIO pin on the Raspberry Pi.  By pressing on the two bolts with a finger, an interactee creates an electrical connection between the two bolts through their skin and the moisture on their body31. 4.2.3 SlidersWhile the DS does have eight potentiometer voltage dividers the interfaces other eight voltage dividers, the sliders, are atypical in their approach to interaction. The goal while designing the slider style voltage dividers was to remove the physical abstraction that rests between the human and the circuitry and to create a more direct interaction: just like with the buttons discussed in the previous section. Figure : How a potentiometer or slider works.	A slider is mechanical component that functions electronically as a variable resistor. Although the exact manner in which sliders, or pots, create a controllable variable resistance varies it usually consists of a strip of resistive material, (carbon, plastic, etc.), is touching a movable conductive wiper. The wiper is moved using mechanical force to adjust its point of contact. The three leads of the slider correspond with the two sides of the resistive strip and the conductive wiper.  A common use for slider, and how the DS is using its sliders, is to connect the component to a circuit so it functions as a voltage divider. By connecting the two leads of the resistive strip to the circuits power and ground and the wiper lead to an input pin of our A/D converter the component is able to adjust the voltage seen at the input node. 	The DS slider design functions identically to a conventional potentiometer; it has a strip of resistive wire that comes into contact with a conductive copper tape at different locations producing a variable voltage at the wiper node. What makes the DS sliders different is not how they behave electronically, but is instead how they are constructed. Instead of separating our body from the electrons flowing through the circuitry the DS sliders remove the physical mechanisms which keep the wiper attached to the resistive strip, removes any extraneous and unnecessarily casing and empowers our bodies electrical properties to effect the controller.      The wire is strung across two bridges that position the wire about a half an inch above a strip of copper tape. One end of the Kanthal wire is attached to system ground while the other end is connected to the power rail on the Raspberry Pi. The copper tape is hooked up to one of the inputs on one of the two MCP3008 A/D converter. The MCP3008 8-channel 10-bit A/D converters are able to be powered off the Raspberry Pi’s power rail and is controlled over SPI serial.[42] When the tungsten wire is pressed against the copper tape a voltage divider is created.         [NV49]The sliders use 32 gauge Kanthal32 wire as a sit-in for the resistive strips found in mass-manufactured sliders. The Kanthal wires measure 8-thousandths of an inch thick which provides  high enough resistance, around twenty ohms, for the device to function while still being thick enough to keep unprotected fingers safe. The copper tape that the Kanthal wire is hovering above, on the other hand, has an extremely low resistance of less than 1 Ohm and, more or less, electronically functions the same as a wire would. [NV50] As the overall resistance of the sliders is under 25 Ohms, the voltage dividers draw a fairly large amount of current at about 110mA each. Unlike a microcontroller, such as the Arduino, which is designed to source moderate current levels to each of its GPIO pins, the Raspberry Pi 2 has relatively low maximum current ratings for its GPIO pins and is comparatively limited in its functionality. The Pi is designed with the expectation of 3mA current draw from each of its pins, with a maximum draw of 16mA from a single pin33.[40] The combined current draw of all eight of my deconstructed sliders was more than the Pi could handle at over 800mA. The solution was to add a resistor in series with the tungsten wire with a value of 1k. While this reduced the fidelity of the signal from the sensor, with software smoothing it was usable. The low precision of the sliders was offset by the eight high quality store-bought potentiometers which were also a part of the interface. The potentiometers were mapped to parameters requiring high precision while the sliders were mapped to more expressive axes of control.       A pecurality of the slider design becomes apparent when they are not being pressed. The Kanthal wire moves back to its resting position breaking the circuit and causing the interface to read a 0 for that channel.  In this way, the DS sliders do not hold its last value as a typical potentiometer or slider does. In a way, the DS sliders function as normally open potentiometers: meaning they will only return a value when physical force is being applied to them. This quirk ended up being desirable under some circumstances: working well for controlling expressive effects, filters, or sample playback parameters. At other times, this behavior became problematic. In compositions with parameters that demanded the ability to hold and maintain an intermittent value, the parameters had to be mapped to the standard potentiometers. To offset this limitation, the interface is often presented with several copper pipe segments. The pipes can be used to maintain an electronic connection between the copper tape and Kanthal wire allowing the performer to hold intermittent values on the sliders; freeing up fingers for other tasks.      This circuitry allowed for the performer to directly complete the circuitry for the voltage divider without acting through a physical abstraction. No barrier between the human finger and the electrons flowing through the synthesizer is constructed. This gives this instrument a quality that is somewhat unique within the domain of computer interfaces; it will electronically react differently to the person depending on their unique electrical properties.[NV51]4.3  Camouflage and ExposureFigure 21: Second version of the Retrono Synthesizers.This section looks at the Retrono interface, used in the Cathode Ray Tubes installation, as a case study in repurposing preexisting electronic systems as well as exposing circuitry to direct human contact as a means of control. The Retrono interface is an appropriated video game console which is repackaged to facilitate a completely new and different interaction schema between the device and interactee. The interface exposes, highlights, and reveals the internal circuitry of the device, ironically disguising it from recognition and liberating it from the uses of its past life.4.3.1 Retrono – Design ApproachThe Retrono interface is not a blue-sky project built from the ground up from a concept. Instead, creating a Retrono is an act of removal and replacement as oppose to construction. The interface is essentially a Retron retro video game console, a product of the Hyperkin corporation which specializes in video game hardware. The Retron console is a hardware emulator for the famed Nintendo Entertainment System, or the NES, and was capable of playing original NES game cartridges and using NES controllers. To turn the Retron into a Retrono takes three steps:1. The controller ports, reset button, and power button are removed from the Retron.2.  The red power LED is replaced with a white LED. 3. The original plastic cases are removed and the hardware is rehoused in a laser cut box made of clear acrylic.The boxes have four holes: one for the power, two for the video and audio outputs, and one large rectangular opening on the top of the enclosure directly above where the unit’s main circuitry is housed for interfacing with the electronics. The final opening intentionally exposes the Retronos circuitry to outside interference and is how the interface is intended to be interfaced with. The case does not allow a game cartridge to be inserted into the console and the Retron is forever unable to play NES games. The lack of a game does not deter the console from attempting to make sense of the electrical charges on the pins of the cartridge port as it would with an actual NES. The console attempts to decode the charges as video and audio data and the once video game console is transformed into an 8-bit audio-visual synthesizer which is controlled by the electrical properties of its user’s body.	Retronos are most effective when they are used in close proximity to CRT TV’s which display their output. The strong electromagnetic field emanating from the TV’s tubes effectively turbocharge the reactiveness of the Retronos while creating a feedback look between the TV and the Retrono. In this configuration, the Retrono’s output is consistently varied while the entire system becomes even more prone to interference. There is no right, or wrong, way to interact with a Retrono as they are not functional in a conventional sense. They are created out of the authors desire for a hyper-reactive system that people can play with and explore without the burden of any expectations or instructions.4.4 Re-Appropriation of ConventionsThe Modular SNES interface, introduced in this section, originated from the authors desire to experiment with using Arduino assisted circuit bending techniques on retro video game consoles. While earlier circuit bent SNES consoles featured rotary switches to make and break the curated bends, there was a need to create a version of the console that was more flexible, modular, and robust. The activity of circuit bending is steeped in exploration and discovery and I wanted the experience of using the Modular SNES to embody those values. I did not, however, want the interface to be so alien that those inexperienced with circuitry would be deterred from spending time with the device. To allow for flexibility, while still working within a preexisting system with conventions and expectations, the Modular SNES was modeled after the patchbay interface and is controlled by using patch cords to connect different parts of the SNES console to itself or the onboard Arduino Nano. 4.4.1 Modular SNES: Project DescriptionFigure 22: Modular SNES circuit bent video game console.The Modular SNES is a modified Super Nintendo Entertainment System that has been hacked and circuit bent using an Arduino Nano microcontroller. As the internal logic levels of the SNES is 5V  and the system is designed with at least 500mA of current overhead, the console can internally power an Arduino Nano microcontroller.  [NV52][Advantages – people immediately know what to do if they have messed with modular before] [disadvantages – people think they know what is going on when they really don’t]4.5 DeceptionThis section presents the Symbiotic SNES (SSNES) as well as the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) as examples of interfaces that are designed to deceive their users.  First the SSNES is introduced along with its method of presenting familiar interfaces that behave in unexpected ways, breaking your expectations. Next, the “6 * 9 = 42” installation’s interface and software system, the CTSB, is presented as a more sinister example of a deceptive interface. 4.5.1 Symbiotic SNES: Project DescriptionThe SSNES is a small Arduino powered “black-box” which intercepts controller messages from standard SNES controllers and alters the data before sending it to an unaware SNES console. Besides the fact that the SSNES physically exists, there is no indication to either the SNES or the Player that an agent is acting on the data that the SNES is acting upon. The controllers do not look any different than a standard regular controller; as they are unmodified, regular controllers. The console receives, and acts upon, the messages just as it would without the SSNES inserted into the signal chain. The SSNES acts a saboteur or psi-operative, coloring the data into misinformation as it attempts to create new experiences from familiar technology. What the system does to the controller date before sending it off to the SNES console depends on the current operating mode (see table 4). [NV53]NameOperationResultUltimate Co-OpBitwise ANDOnly buttons pressed by both players are passed to the console.Bitwise XOROnly buttons pressed by one player will get passed to the console. (multiplayer mode)Alternating-PressesButton PressesPlayers alternate total control over the character after a predetermined number of button presses.Alternating-TimeTurn LengthsPlayers alternate total control over the character over a set period of time.Two FaceController SplitPlayers alternate control over different parts of the controller. Table 4:  Sampling of play modes supported by Symbiotic SNES.      There have been over a dozen single player and multiplayer modes programmed for the SSNES. What makes the single player modes different from the multiplayer modes is not the number of people that play the game but instead is the type of game the mode supports. Both the single player and multiplayer modes require two players to operate. The single player modes will support SNES games where one player is controlling a character on screen at a time,34 while the multiplayer modes will support SNES games where two players are able to control a in-game character at the same time35. The single player modes each present a way two participants can play a single player game together. For example, the “Agree” mode only sends messages (button presses) to the SNES if both of the input controllers are pressing the same button at the same time forcing the two players to press the same buttons as the same time on their controllers if they want to get anything done in the game world. This is different from the multiplayer experiences offered when these games were designed and is even different from any experience in modern games because the two players are not controlling two independent characters but instead have to work in tandem to control a singular character.  Each of the modes create a completely new and unique way to experience content that was created decades ago. The SSNES system allows us to play nostalgic classics for the first time with our friends and loved ones in a truly co-operative way. 4.5.2 Symbiotic SNES - Technical DetailsFigure 24: Early version of Symbiotic SNES hardware.Two SNES knock off controllers have their plugs cut off and wires stripped. The SNES controller uses five wires to communicate with the SNES console. The SNES powers the circuitry on the controller with the first two wires which are 5V and GND. The other three pins are for communication: clock, latch, and data. Thanks to the XXXXX Arduino library it is just a simple matter of (INSERT CODE) to read in incoming controller data. [NV54]Once the Arduino knows which buttons are being pressed on the two input controllers it performs its logic before flipping digital pins that are connected to pads with wires soldered into them whose other ends are soldered to each of the button pads of a SNES controller. When the sensing side of the button pad reads 5v it sends an ‘ON’ messages to the SNES, instead of the controller receiving this voltage via the bridging of the two sides of the button, the Arduino mimics this be sending its own voltage to the pad.       As oppose to my other work with SNES consoles, this project is completely portable. The Symbiotic SNES system will work on any production SNES ever made and is not tied to any hardware modifications to the console itself. As the SNES’s internal voltage level is most always 5v, the console lends itself nicely to interfacing with Arduino microcontrollers, in this project the Arduino is directly powered through its output connections to the SNES console.        The SNES controller’s buttons are purely binary, meaning they are either on or off with no alternative: this lends itself nicely to bitwise logic operations. In fact, that is how all of the first mods started out.  If the controller inputs from the two controllers have a bitwise AND performed on them the resulting interaction will be that no messages get sent through unless both controllers are pressing the same button at the same time: which is the “Agree” mode. Likewise, if a XOR is performed on the incoming controller data only buttons that are pressed on a single controller are sent through, but if both controller press the button they cancel each other out and no message is sent to the host.      The second category of modes are the multiplayer modes which were designed to be used when playing a multiplayer competitive game. 4.5.3 [NV55]“6 x 9 = 42” and the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot The Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) consists of a simple hardware interface along with a few hundred lines of Processing code. The interface is minimal and is made up of a single push button and a twelve-position rotary switch. The two components are housed in a small metal box which is typically used for guitar-effect-pedal construction. The enclosure is connected via USB to a host computer which runs the Processing program.	Upon initialization the CTSB creates three different greyscale image masks: one for each of the primary colors. As the program runs, it stores the 256 most recent images captured from the host computers webcam and stores them in a FIFO36 buffer. With each new video frame the program calculates the color of each pixel one at a time. For each pixel that is being calculated the program references the value stored in each of the three master image mask’s corresponding pixel. The resulting RGB value is then used to look up a corresponding image stored in the FIFO buffer. This process is repeated for the green and blue values of the pixel before the entire being applied to all of the pixels to be displayed on screen for that frame.      Each of the hardware interfaces rotary switch’s twelve positions correspond to a different combination of algorithms used to create the master masks used for the slit-scan processing37. When the switch is turned the program will recreate the three master masks and the video output will take on different aesthetic qualities. When the pushbutton is pressed the program reconstructs the masks using the rule set dictated by the rotary switch. The result is a variation of the aesthetics dictated by the switch.       While the resulting video produced by the CTSB is entertaining, beautiful, and somewhat magical it comes at a cost to the user. The hidden purpose of the CTSB is not to create beautifully psychedelic videos, but instead is to gather data about the political affiliation of the gallery visitors. Ten percent of the time, chosen randomly, the pushbutton is pressed the CTSB executes its surveillance routine. The program analyzes the color content of the frame it is about to display on screen. It adds up all of the red and blue values for all of the pixels and determines if the image overall contains more red or blue. According to the results of this “chroma analysis”, the CTSB determines the interactee is either Republican (if there is more red) or Democrat (if there is more blue). Although this system for determining ones political affiliation is obviously naive and erroneous, the CTSB proclaims the results of its findings along with its evidence (the image) on Twitter in the form of a tweet proclaiming allegiance to the affiliated political party.4.5.4 CTSB – Interaction DesignFigure 25: Chroma Temporal Surveillance Bot interface, final design on right.The CTSB has gone through two major hardware revisions. The first version of the interface consisted of six N.O. push-buttons on the top of a BB aluminum project enclosure box. Inside of the enclosure, an Arduino Nano recognizes button presses and reports the events to a Processing sketch running on a host computer. The Processing program handles communication with the hardware, reading images from the computers webcam, computing the slit-scan processing, and displaying the video output. Each of the buttons on the controller gave the user an axis of control over the slit-scan processing. This included: changing the buffer length, reconstructing a mask, cycling through the mask types, toggling between Red, Green, and Blue channel separation, inverting the color processing, tweeting a photo, and cycling through different frame rates. This multitude of control resulted in millions of different program states that could be achieved. After some testing, it became apparent that something simpler which facilitated a curated set of states was required. 	The second, and final, version of the interface contained a single button that redraws the slit-scan masks used to calculate the displayed image and a twelve-position continuous rotary switch which allowed the user to choose between the different program states. The simplified design allows gallery viewers to consistently experience the program in a curated, yet dynamic, state. This eliminates confusion about each individual button’s effect on the displayed image, while still inviting exploration and allowing for a multitude of possibilities. [NV56]As the interface needs to attract participants to collect data, it is important that the device appears friendly, innocent, and easy to use. The hardware interface is straightforward, familiar, and easy to understand to hide the software’s more sinister purpose. 4.6 Removing AgencyThis section introduces the EavesDropper interface, used in the installation Electrical Box, as a device that attempts to minimalize its user’s agency over its functionality by removing access to its operational parameters. The reasoning behind this design decision, how the interface technically functions, and the psychological implications to its interactions are discussed.   One of the goals for the EavesDropper to impart on its user the sensation of gaining a superhuman ability while avoiding giving the user the impression that they are in control of the device, or even fully understand it. Figure 26: Eavesdropper magnetic field listening device.4.6.1 EavesdropperThe Eavesdropper is presented to its users as a black box38 which obscures  its internal workings and logic from the outside. The devices present no instructions, explanations, or ever options for control to its users. The absence of any user control removes the need for a calibration process and operational learning curves while avoiding usage possible mishaps from device miscalibration. The experience and interaction that is meant to be imparted onto users is not calibrating the device, but holding the device up to EM fields. Ideally, the EavesDropper functions as an extension of the body; a task easier to achieve with a simple, intuitive interface. Scott Summers, a.k.a. Cyclops of X-Men fame, and his destructive vision is an apt analogy. Cyclops’ destructive energy-ray vision is always on as long as his eyes are open: always blazing away at 100% power. He has no option for calibrating the destructive power of his vision and relies on his ruby quartz glasses to keep the destructive might at bay. While I do not users to feel burdened by the EavesDroppers, I do want them to feel removed from controlling the devices. I wanted peoples sense of magnetic eavesdropping to be something that they either have, in fully power, or do not have.4.6.2 EavesDropper – Technical DescriptionFigure 27: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronics.The EavesDropper devices leverage the properties of EM inductance to sense changes in the magnetic field that the device emits. Changes in this EM field, resulting from external sources, creates a voltage difference in the device which causing a small current to flow. This signal is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones where it is transduced into acoustic energy as sound. Figure 28: EavesDropper electrical system diagram.      Each EavesDropper system consists of a small metal tin that houses a battery and all of the electronics as well as a pair of Telex headphones plugged into the side of the tin. The tins house a single-coil guitar pickup, a stereo amplifier, a ¼” headphone jack, and a lithium ion battery. The amplifiers are small 1.85cm x 2.11cm breakout boards that house PAM8403 ICs which provide enough amplification to boost the output of the pickups to an audible level39. The PAM8403’s features a filter-less architecture allowing it to drive the headphones directly eliminating the need for additional components and prolonging the devices battery life. The amplifiers are efficient Class-D amplifiers, which operate off of a supply voltage between 2.5 and 5.5 volts40, which consume less power than comparable Class AB or Class A amplifiers. [43] To save space and money I abstained from the use of battery cases in favor of soldering male JST41 RC battery plugs directly to the terminals of the batteries42. I wrapped the batteries and cables in electrical tape and coated the ends with liquid electrical tape. This insulated the batteries from the metallic case, saved space while providing an interface for hot-swapping the batteries. [NV57]4.7 Orchestrating CircuitryThe Voltage Slammer interface, introduced in this section, is an experimental circuit bending tool and controller. The Voltage Slammer is both used to circuit bend electronic devices, such as toys and radios, as well as control those devices in a manner similar to a musical sequencer. The interface’s goal is twofold: first, to control several different electrical systems that would otherwise have to be controlled locally; second, to accelerate and simplify the circuit bending process. Both of these goals are realized with the Voltage Slammer through the creation of ensembles of battery powered electronic devices and the orchestration of those ensembles in installations and performances.[NV58]4.7.1 The Voltage SlammerFigure 29: The Voltage Slammer (v1) controlling a small ensemble of toys.The Voltage Slammer interface is designed to provide centralized control over a variety of circuit bent battery powered toys. The interface has gone through two major hardware revisions: the first interface was made of wood, included less channels of control and did not include as much visual feedback as the second revision.  Its first eight output channels produce PWM43 signals. Each of these channels have a corresponding potentiometer and switch. The potentiometer is used to modulate the pulse width of the outgoing signal, effectively producing more current and higher voltage to the client device. The switch cuts off the current flow to the client device entirely. Small LEDs are positioned above the switches which light up along with the output signal. These outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation. The next five outputs are similar to the first eight with the noticeable exception that they have no feedback LEDs, no on/off switches and are arranged on the interface in a separate group. They are used to control motors in bent devices, or any other bend in which a constant current is desired and the output should not be effected by the master delay pot. In the rear of the Voltage Slammer, all thirteen outputs are accessible via RCA connectors. The ring of the RCA cables is connected to the systems common ground which is shared by the Voltage Slammer and all connected devices. The pin carries the signal which originates from the devices Arduino. One additional RCA connection in which both the ring and pin are connected to ground, to allow for easier probing and bending. Lastly, the Voltage Slammer has an ultrasonic rangefinder which allows the interface to be aware of the presence of gallery viewers in the case of installation.Figure 30: The Voltage Slammer, second design.      The second revision of the controller boasts sixteen rotary encoders, with built in push buttons and RGB44 LEDs[NV59], instead of the thirteen potentiometers found on the first version.  The SPST45 toggle switches were replaced with metal pushbuttons with LED rings. The LED rings eliminated the need for adding additional discrete LEDs to the interface and reduced the number of components needed. An additional upgrade form the first version is that the controller can be powered by rechargeable batteries instead of the typical USB, which the interface still supports. As the device is usually controlling battery powered electronics, the entire system can be easily mobilized for performance, or installation, in locations without access to a power grid.       The Voltage Slammer is not only a mechanism for controlling circuit bent electronics but is additionally a platform for assisting in the activity of circuit bending battery powered devices. The Voltage Slammer is part of an ongoing exploration in controlling circuit bent toys and instruments with Arduino powered interfaces.  It allows for simultaneous control over up to sixteen circuit bent devices.  The interface has a RGB-pushbutton-rotary encoder for each of its sixteen channels of control with an additional eight buttons, also each with their own RGB led. The interface has a RGB led for status and debugging. Lastly, so it had options for its interactivity, it also featured two ultrasonic rangefinders: one facing upwards and the other facing forward.       The front and sides of the interface has built in ultra-sonic rangefinders granting the interface a rough sense of spacial awareness. This proved especially beneficial when the interface was used in an installation setting. When the installation is idol, it will remain off for just under a minute before pulsing all its channels, calling out for interactees. It continues to repeate this cycle until someone approaches. Thanks to its ultrasonic rangefinder the Voltage Slammer was aware of the presence of humans. When no-one was near the device the device entered into a resting state. It stopped sending continuous signals to its circuit bent minions and was mostly silent, allowing the toys to complete the cycles they might have been currently engaged in. The Voltage Slammer will then proceed to randomly pulse one of the devices every two minutes. This is an act to silicate attention from anyone in the gallery. Once the presence of a body is detected by the voltage slammer the device will enter into its active state; again sending messages out to its toys.	The result of the Voltage Slammers interaction with its circuit bent toys was in a state of constant flux: it was hard to predict what the actual results might be from one sitting to another. The system would behave differently if there were five devices connected or ten devices as each new device that was added changed the electronic properties of the system.       feature 16 rotary knobs with built in push buttons and RGB46 LEDs. I replaced the SPST47 toggle switches with large sleeker metal pushbuttons, also with LED’s inside. The current interface is powered by an Arduino Mega and can be either batter powered or powered via USB. It functions both as a controller for specially hacked toys or electronic devices or as a useful tool for hardware hacking and circuit probing/bending. It is designed specifically for working with low voltage DC circuits and can’t handle anything high voltage or high current. Its first eight output channels are PWM48 waves each with a pot controlling intensity (PW) and a switch to cut off the current flow entirely. The first eight outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation.[NV60]4.7.2 [NV61]OneToFour – Interface DescriptionFigure 31: OneToFour installed in a private residence in 2016.OneToFour is a modified, extended version of the SSNES interface discussed in section 4.5.2. which allows a single SNES controller to send its controller messages to up to four SNES consoles simultaneously. Just like the SSNES interface OneToFour has two female jacks which accept any SNES compatible controller. As oppose to the SSNES interface which has an output for each of the input controllers, OneToFour has a total of eight output ports. The Arduino Mega, which acts as the brain of OneToFour, is housed in a small clear plastic box, so that its feedback LED’s, one for each button, can be viewed if desired. The devices distribution of the control messages to the four different attached consoles is done through common electrical connections. This ensures that the messages reach their destined consoles simultaneously. This devices affords experimentation with divergence between the consoles due to discrepancies in their internal clocks, their hardware capabilities, and other factors. 4.8 ConclusionThis chapter presented experimental interfaces under the context of six approaches to addressing human-circuit interaction. How users interact with the interfaces was discussed for each approach. Collectively, the design approaches introduced in this chapter serve as explorations into our relationship with electrical systems. They strive to invite us to minimalize our distance from the electrical systems we prevalently use and to rethink our relationships, interactions, and co-existence with electrical systems.Chapter 5 Approaches to Human-Robot PerformanceThis chapter introduces performances that utilize four different approaches to stage dynamics and compositional responsibility during human-mechatronic performance. Humans Leading Intelligent Mechatronic Instrumentalists, discusses performances that are human-lead but involve reactive, intelligent mechatronic performers as well. The next section, Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Humans discusses performances where the music is written for mechatronic instrumentalists to perform, but for humans to listen to and enjoy. This is contrasted by the next section, Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves, which covers performances that are written within the perceptual and/or aesthetic frame of the mechatronic instrumentalists themselves, with the human enjoyment secondary. This idea is compounded and distilled in the fourth section: Exclusive Robot-Centric Performances which explores performances that are disrupted by the presence of humans, that are intended only for mechatronic personalities.        Examining human-mechatronic performances in terms of agency and role affords unique opportunities to analyze performance opportunities when it comes to these events. [NV62]PerformanceHuman Role During Performance?Who is the Composer?Mechatronic Role During Performance?Category of PerformanceRobot WhispersOrchestrate robots through voiceThe human performersInstrumentHeadless mechatronicBeatlesNoneHumans, and a digital co-composerInstrumentHeadless mechatronicRobot Improvisational JamInstrumentalistThe human performersInstrumentMechatronic instruments played by humansHedonism BotInstrumentalistThe human performers and the mechatronic personalityInstrumentalist,ComposerMechatronic instrumentalists performing with humanHello HumansNoneA single humanInstrumentHeadless mechatronicComputer MusicNoneA single humanInstrumentHeadless mechatronicAntiSocialInstigator/ComposerAudiencePersonalitySocial interactionNo Humans AllowedInstigatorThe mechatronic personalitiesPersonalitySocial interaction	Table 5: Approaches to mechatronic preformance presented in this chapter.5.1 Mechatronic EntitiesThis section defines, compares, and contrasts the authors terms: mechatronic instruments, mechatronic instrumentalists, mechatronic personalities, and digital co-composers. The roles that each of these entries have in music performance is touched upon.5.1.1 Mechatronic Instrument“A robotic musical instrument is a sound-making device that automatically creates music with the use of mechanical parts, such as motors, solenoids and gears.”[44, p. 1] [NV63]This paper defines a mechatronic instrument just as xxx defines a robotic musical instrument. [NV64]The mechatronic instrument is the base-line that other configurations are compared to and is common compared to its instrumentalist and personality counterparts. Despite the vast variety in individual form, all mechatronic musical instruments share the following traits:• A mechatronic instrument is played, just as any other instrument might be played. It has notes written for it, and a program tells it what to play. • The instruments are unaware of who is in the room, the reactions of their environment, the drifting tempo, or anything else about their environment and state of being: just like a guitar is unaware of these things. • Mechatronic instruments do not generate music on their own accord, but instead need to be instructed to play by a software program or human proxy.[‘p;The Machine Lab at CalArts is a perfect example of an ensemble of mechatronic instruments[32]. The robots of the Machine Orchestra that called the Machine Lab home are controlled through a central server but do not themselves exhibit any awareness of their surroundings or reveal any intelligent actions. Mechatronic instruments can be played either in real time by using some digital interface or can be controlled by code that is started the manner in which they are controlled is secondary to the fact that they are intended to be controlled directly by humans. 5.1.2 Mechatronic InstrumentalistA mechatronic instrumentalist is a mechatronic instrument that is able to exercise some degree of agency over its performance parameters without direct human input in real time. The category of mechatronic instrumentalists includes mechatronic instruments with feedback systems that allow them to adjust their performance on the fly as well as mechatronic instruments that utilize machine learning to react to other performers and the events on stage. What makes a mechatronic instrumentalist an instrumentalist instead of the instrument is autonomy and the ability to make decisions, just as a human instrumentalist is required to do. It is not the hardware configuration of the robot, but instead how the robot uses its hardware.[45][NV65]5.1.3 Mechatronic PersonalityA mechatronic entity which exhibits traits of intelligence, preference, and personality. Mechatronic personalities can also be a Mechatronic Instrument but does not have to be. They make decisions based on personality traits that area not intrinsically linked to music performance. They are in-fact not designed to be instruments, but instead make sound that can be considered music during their operation. The robots utilized in the installation No Humans Allowed discussed in the third chapter are examples of mechatronic personalities.[NV66]5.1.4 Digital Co-ComposerWhenever human composers relinquish playback control to a computational entity they are relying on a digital co-composer. This includes the use of random numbers, API49’s or other web services, and many algorithms. Digital co-composers are common, especially in compositions that are written using a text based coding languages. Just as in Jazz the composer leaves a good deal of room for the players to freely interpret the song and play within its guidelines. Digital co-composers allow composers of electronic music to relinquish some of the specifics of the interpretation of a composition to the players. [NV67]5.2 The Pantheon Mechatronic SystemThe Pantheon is a mechatronic art system which originated as an adaptation of the servers and hardware used by the music technology department at CalArts to control the mechatronic instruments residing in the Machine Lab. The system is structured to be modular, flexible, and easy to learn and constitutes the technological core of my mechatronic installations and inventions. This section provides an overview of the software and hardware systems that make up the Pantheon mechatronic system.5.2.1 ServerFigure 32: The Pantheon Server initialization routine.[NV68]The Pantheon server is programmed in the ChucK programming language[46]–[49] and plays host to mechatronic instruments and sensor banks in several the installations presented in earlier chapters. To ensure that the server is able to keep track of any number of microcontroller clients, a handshake routine is run whenever the server is initialized to sort out the Pantheon related microcontrollers from other USB devices that are plugged into the host computer. The routine requests an identification number (ID) from each USB device connected to the server computer. Pantheon boards connected to the computer respond with their unique ID allowing the server to disseminate information about the microcontroller while unrelated devices ignore the message. The server uses this ID to assign a corresponding OSC address to the Arduino. After the handshake is complete, the server starts listening on the network for any OSC messages that correspond to the Arduinos who completed the handshake. If the server recognizes a valid OSC address that also includes valid arguments, it proceeds to forward the message to the appropriate instrument using a custom serial communication protocol. In addition to the OSC listener, a supplementary ChucK script can be run to convert MIDI messages found on an internal IAC bus into OSC messages that The Pantheon server understands. This simple, yet flexible, system allows for the easy addition of any number of clients, provides a standardization for interfacing with the instruments, and gives the system administrator a built in diagnostic test to ensure each of the devices is properly communicating with the host computer. The boards connected to the system that houses the actuators and sensors can be controlled using any programming language, or pre-built interface that is able to output either MIDI or OSC messages. 5.2.1.1 SensorsWhile usually the microcontrollers used in the Pantheon system only receive messages from the server, the Arduinos that have sensors onboard also send messages about the values of their sensors to the server. During the handshake routine, if any of the microcontrollers are discovered to have sensors the server will spork a shred50 which infinitely polls the Arduino shield for its readings. No smoothing or filtering is conducted in the firmware before the data is sent to the server. The firmware is kept as simple as possible with signal conditioning being carried out in ChucK on the server side. This allows for quicker calibration of the signal conditioning and eases confusion when flashing microcontrollers with updated firmware. The Pantheon polls the Arduinos to ensure that the user has total control over any possible crosstalk between the different shields. This is especially important with ultrasonic rangefinders which have to be triggered one at a time and with an interval of dead-time in-between readings to avoid false positives and inaccurate readings. 5.2.1.2 Digital ConductorWhen the server is working with larger instruments or personalities that each consist of multiple microcontrollers,51the server initializes a Digital Conductor software process which organizes the multiple devices into larger constructs providing a more intuitive interface for the human composer to work with. The digital conductor orchestrates the overall activity of each of the mechatronic personalities in addition to acting as a conduit for communication between the different Arduinos used in the ensemble. While the mechatronic personalities each keep track of their own actuator shields, the digital conductor keeps tabs on the states of each of the personalities and has executive control over the personalities meta behavior. While the digital conductor is concerned with the behavior of each of the personalities, it does not exhibit direct control over what the personalities are doing; just as an orchestral conductor does not play a violin or piano during a concert. The conductor is not a part of the personalities directly, but instead acts as the glue that binds their communication and interaction to the world.[NV69]5.2.2 OSCThe Pantheon uses Open SoundControl (OSC) messages to orchestrate communication between clients and servers.[50] OSC has many advantages over similar protocols, such as MIDI, that are often used for controlling music instruments. One advantage is that OSC gives the user the freedom to define schemas for their server allowing for customization options unavailable in the MIDI specs. OSC is built around the UDP52 internet protocol and naturally works seamlessly over the networks is requires to operate. This allows for installations and performances to be decentralized via wireless communication: liberating performers and sculptures from the burden of cables. MIDI limits the range of values for notes and velocities to the range of 0-127 while OSC, on the other hand, is able to send full 32-bit integers ranging from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,637, floating point numbers, strings, and even audio data or video frames disguised as what the protocol refers to as “blobs”. While the OSC schema that The Pantheon uses depends on the demands of the project, for installations that utilize the mechatronic personality architecture, the OSC schema for communicating with the microcontroller clients defined as “/xyz/n/v” where:• x is the personality number• y is the board type (1: Brigid, 2: Homados, 3: Hermes, 4: Theia)• z is the board number of its type within its parent personality• n is the note number (0-63)• v is the velocity (0-1023)5.2.3 ShieldsMany shield have been designed for use with the Pantheon system to handle a variety of common requirements when creating mechatronic installation or performance. While the functionality of each board is specialized and their construction varies, all share a grouping of common traits:• All connectors used are Molex Mini-Fit Jr. which can handle up to 9.0Amps, feature fully isolated terminals, locking housings, low engagement forces, and polarized housings• All boards are designed to be shields for either the Arduino Uno or Arduino Mega• The ‘tops’ of all the connectors are always connected to ground• All boards have a RGB LED that is red while booting, yellow until it completes its handshake, and blue while receiving a message from the server5.2.3.1 BrigidFigure 33: Brigid six-channel actuator shield for the Arduino Uno.[NV70]Brigid is the smallest of the two general purpose actuator shields53 and is designed for use with the Arduino Uno microcontroller.[51] Brigid has a RGB status LED, a I2C port[52], six channels of actuator control54, and an input jack for interfacing with an external power source. Each of the actuator channels utilize a Pulse Width Modification (PWM) pin on the Arduino, instead of a simple digital pin, for added flexibility and control.[53]Figure 34: Circuit for a single Brigid, or Homados, actuator channel[NV71].      The Brigid shield, as well as the larger Homados solenoid driver, employ the same circuit for each of the individual channels (see figure 32). The circuit utilizes AOT460 N-Channel MOSFET transistors55 for each of the channels. The AOT460’s are able to safely handle loads of up to 60Volts and 85Amps giving the system enough headroom to handle any DC solenoids, relays, motors, and light the author is interested in working with.[54] [NV72]The gate of the transistor is connected to one of the Arduino Uno’s PWM pins through a 1k resistor in series. The resistor limits the current draw for each pin putting less strain on the Arduino. The transistor drain is connected to the positive end of the output jack. A 1N4004 clamp diode, with a path to PWR, protects the transistor from any possible inductive fly-back current caused by solenoids.[55] 5.2.3.2 HomadosFigure 35: Homados sixteen channel actuator shield for the Arduino Mega[NV73].Homados is the larger of the two actuator controller shields in the Pantheon system and is designed for use with the Arduino Mega microcontroller. The board supports sixteen channels of actuator control, three I2C jacks, and a RGB status LED. The first fifteen channels of the Homados driver utilizes PWM while the sixteenth channel uses a standard digital pin. The Homados is intended to function as a larger version of the Brigid shield and is to be used when six channels of control are inadequate.5.2.3.3 HermesFigure 36: Hermes four channel stepper motor Arduino Uno shield.[NV74]Hermes is a shield designed for the Arduino Uno microcontroller to control stepper motors. The Hermes shield provides the Arduino with an interface to two Toshiba ULN2803APG high voltage, high current darlington drivers[56] which can be used to control up to four stepper motors. The ULN2803APG is a flexibly chip that each contain eight NPN darlington pairs each with internal clamp diodes for switching inductive loads. Each channel can operate at up to 50Volts, and will source around 125mA of current with a 0.5mA, 5V signal at the gate. The ULN2803APG’s afford control over up to four permanent magnet, or hybrid, unipolar stepper motors that are wired using either the 2-phase or 4-phase unipolar convention. The darling pairs on the Hermes have quick turn-on and turn-off delays, at 0.1 and 0.2 microseconds respectively, allowing the attached stepper motors to be controlled at audio rate to produce sustained tones. In addition to the darlington arrays and output jacks Hermes additionally includes a single I2C channel, a RGB status LED, and two power jacks: one for the motors, and the other for the Arduino. 5.2.3.4 TheiaTheia is designed specifically for interfacing SR-04 ultrasonic rangefinders.56 The shield features eight channels of control for the rangefinders as well as a RGB status LED. Although Theia was specifically designed for use with SR-04 rangefinders, the shield can also be used for other sensors, and actuators. Each of the eight 4-position Mini-Fit Jr. jacks provide power, access to the Arduino’s 5v power rail, and two digital pins. The digital pins can be configured in the firmware to operate as either inputs or outputs allowing the shield to control LEDs or motors, actuators, and sensors that can operate on 5v and with low currents.5.3 Mechatronic Instruments played by HumansThis section presents the Robots Improvisation Jam as an example of a human-mechatronic performance where humans improvise using mechatronic, acoustic, and digital instruments. Although the mechatronic instruments were controlled with varying granularity,57 using a variety of programming languages and physical interfaces, the instruments were always being directly controlled by human performers and the performance did not use any mechatronic instrumentalists or mechatronic personalities.[NV75]5.3.1 Robots Improvisational JamFigure 37: Robots Improvisational Jam as performed in the Machine Lab at CalArts.[NV76]The Robots Improvisational Jam is a group improvisational music performance which featured eight student performers [NV77]each improvising over a loose form with a variety of mechatronic instruments, digital synthesis engines, audio feedback, and traditional string instruments. The mechatronic instruments in the machine lab were all controlled by the performers using interfaces including grid controllers, laptops, and microphones. Throughout the performance, the rhythmic, harmonic, and melodic content was dictated by the actions of the human performers while the robotics did not exhibit agency over their actions. [NV78]5.4 Non-Interactive PerformancesThis section introduces three compositions that feature mechatronic instruments which perform without the guidance of human performers. These compositions follow the “press play and sit down” presentation popularized by the electro-acoustic, computer, and electronic music generas.[57] In these performances, no interaction occurs between the human composer and the mechatronic performers, nor is there any communication or interaction between the mechatronic performers which realize the composition during the performance.      Unlike performances which involve mechatronic instruments being played on stage by human performers, when mechatronic instruments are played without the presence of human performers on stage a completely different stage dynamic emerges. Akin electro-acoustic music performances, the technology and the composer58 take center stage and the expectations for a visual experience is diminished. The attention of the audience is dispersed throughout the room and people are more likely to close their eyes to listen to the music.5.4.1 Beatles[NV79]Beatles is an eight-minute etude written for MalletOTon and Lydia from the Machine Orchestra and is performed in a concert setting. Without introduction, the piece begins quietly with many low velocity messages being sent to Lydia, the mechatronic piano, at quick random intervals. Each individual actuation is barely noticeable and only produces minute mechanical flutters, failing to approach the minimal force required to strike the piano strings with the solenoid plungers. The triggering rate, and overall velocity, of these message slowly increase over a period of a minute. After this gradual build, the messages begin to slow down and fade out as MalletOTon, positioned on the opposite side of the performance space, begins to exhibit the same behavior. Over the next minute MalletOTon goes through the same cycle Lydia just experienced. The two instruments trade off several times, progressively getting louder and faster with each transition. As the actuations approach the point of striking the strings, or keys, the composition enters into the next section.      Both Lydia and MalletOTon become active together and both begin receiving trigger messages from the server. Together the two instruments receive the messages at an increased rate and, at random intervals, one of the instruments will receive a message for the same solenoid in rapid succession causing the actuator to strike the instrument; resulting in a tone. For several moments the performance maintains this condition until, gradually, the messages slow. Over two minutes the messages slow to a stop and the composition is finished. 	The composition relies heavily on random number generators, indeterminacy, and the narrow velocity range when an actuator makes noise, but does not strike its sound making mechanism. As result, every performance of Beatles is unique and each time the composition is actualized the realization will vary. The result of this variance is from the digital co-composer and not the mechatronic instruments, or any human influence. Therefore, this composition utilizes mechatronic instruments and not mechatronic instrumentalists or personalities.  Beatles is coded in the ChucK programming language and was first performed in 2014 for the Composing for Robots final concert in the Machine Lab at CalArts.5.4.2 Hello HumansHello Humans is a five-minute-long mechatronic music composition written for the CalArts Machine Orchestra. The goal when composing Hello Humans’ was to create a composition that would be impossible for human performers to actualize. The composition explores precise rhythmic modulations, specialization, and extremely fast actuations with the nine mechatronic instruments it is written for. Hello Humans is composed in Ableton Live and was performed in a concert setting in the fall of 2016. The composition is through-composed and will result in the same note messages and performance with each realization. Hello Humans is a static work which does not rely on a digital co-composer.       Hello Humans begins with [NV80]the chime of a bell on MahaDeviBot. As the reverberations of the bell fades into the room, BreakBot’s snare brush slowly starts to rub on the head of the drum head. Slowly, bells, chimes, and cymbals quietly begin to accompany the brush. The tempo slowly increases over several minutes as other percussion instruments from MahaDeviBot, GanaPatiBot, JackBox, and BreakBot enter into the sonority. climbs. xxx. [NV81]      Hello Humans could not have been performed by human performers due to complexities in its rhythmic structure, constant subtle tempo changes, and physical impossibilities. The performance exhibits no human presence and is not even introduced by a human. It presents the robots foremost as the sole performers: not having to share the stage with humans. It makes use of specialization and the fact that the instruments are spread throughout the space, with several robots hanging above the audience member heads59. 5.4.3 Computer Music Computer Music is a mechatronic ensemble of floppy disk drives, CD-ROM drives, stepper motors, and Hard Disk Drives as well as an eight hour long musical performance. When Computer Music was shown at the Digital Arts Expo it was installed and active between 12:00PM and 8:00PM and throughout the[NV82] day the ensemble performed a single composition.       Computer Music could only have been performed with mechatronic instruments due to both the length of the piece and the subtle complexity of the rhythmic phasing that the composition is structured around. The intent is not for gallery goers to stay for the entire composition or that they nesicarally fully understand the scope of the performance. The peice is not presented as a concert performance, but instead as an installation which features a mechatronic sonic sculpture. Regardless of the presentation, for the mechatronic instruments the installation was a musical concert performance. Just because these pieces are conceived as for the enjoyment of the robots, does not exclude humans from observing the performance and formulating their own appreciation. What makes these works for the bot is the fact that humans are either not intended and are unable to experience the unaltered composition (in the case of NHA) or, in the case of Computer Music, the composition is written on a scale that is not aligned with a human’s temporal orientation.[NV83]5.5 Humans Interacting with Robots in Musical PerformancesRobot Whispers60 and Hedonism Bot61 are two examples of musical performances which present reactive mechatronic systems that listen for input from human performers to determine their respective course of action. The approach to human-robot interaction taken in the two examples differ. In Robot Whispers, an ensemble of seven mechatronic instrumentalists react to the whisperings of two human performers while in Hedonism Bot, a single mechatronic personality reacts to the physical proximity of three human performers feeding on their music to create its own tunes. 5.5.1 Robot Whispers - Performance Description[NV84]Robot Whispers was composed in collaboration with Eric Heep62 and Danny Clarke63 in the fall of 2015 for the Compositing for Robots class final concert at CalArts. Instead of directly dictating the notes that each of the robots would play during the performance we decided to create a system for the robots to listen to us and react to the frequency content of our voices[NV85].      Throughout the performance a text score is algorithmically generated by a computer program in real time and is printed to a terminal window. The score contains information about the words that should be spoken, the tone in which they should be uttered, and the desired speaking speed. Eric and Danny followed the text score by quietly speaking the words into microphones. The audio from the microphones are processed with reverb and delay before being amplified and sent through quad sound into the performance space. Only the wet signal is amplified and after the extensive processing the audio is unintelligible. The microphones have a STFT performed on the input spectrum in real time. The system split the spectrum up into several MEL bands each representing a range of frequencies.[58] My job throughout the course of the performance is to use a Mini-Korg controller to control a threshold for each of the three frequency bins. If the overall amplitude of the band is higher than the threshold that I set, the robots will chime in and play with us: attempting to echo our language. Three groups are made with the robots in the Machine Lab dividing up their various actuator into a high, medium and low group. Each of the three actuator groups are mapped to the FFT groups so that each FFT group corresponds to its equivalent actuator group.[NV86]5.6 Mechatronic Personality Social PerformancesThis section discusses No Humans Allowed as an installation that creates a community of mechatronic personalities[NV87], each with their own rules for social interaction. Although, the sounds the bots make in the installation are often rhythmic and could be classified as musical under some definitions, any musical qualities are simply a byproduct of the social interaction taking place in the gallery. [NV88]5.6.1 Mechatronic PersonalitiesFigure 38: Model-A (left) and Model-B (right) mechatronic personalities.The author has created three mechatronic personalities for the purpose of exploring human-mechatronic interaction. Two models of personalities have been created: Model-A and Model-B. Both are approximately five feet tall, are constructed primarily from extruded aluminum, are powered by the Pantheon mechatronic art system, have ultrasonic rangefinders poised at all four their  sides, and feature dozens of solenoids and LED strips which can be controlled by the server. Model-A (figure 36, left) has six rotary solenoids, six large push-pull solenoids, and six smaller push-pull solenoids. None of the solenoids serve any explicate musical or mechanic purpose and are used for expression. The rotary solenoids are hanging in air while the small and large push-pull solenoids simply bang against the aluminum skeleton. Model-B (figure 36, right) does not have rotary solenoids but instead features sixteen additional push-pull solenoids. Only a single Model-A personality was constructed while two Model-B personalities were built. The Model-B personalities differ from each other minorly in their assembly and construction but are functionally exactly the same.	Apart from their minor differences, the personalities have many things in common. To streamline the amount to cables going to each robot, each of the personalities has its own seven-channel powered USB hub and power strip. The USB hubs allows the five Arduinos required to control all of the sensors, solenoids, and LED’s to be condensed down to be interfaced using a single USB cable. To accommodate the LED strips, as well as the different sizes and types of solenoids, each of the bots contains a 15amp, 24V and a 30amp, 12V switching power supply. The USB hub, and two power supplies, are plugged into a power strip allowing each bot to be powered with a single extension cable. To help with mobility, the personalities each have casters allowing them to be easily pushed around. 5.6.2 AntiSocialAntiSocial is the authors first performance which features mechatronic personalities. In AntiSocial, a Model-A personality is given the behavior patterns of Craig and is forced to interact with gallery viewers for several hours. Craig suffers from severe social anxiety and is poor at communicating and socializing with both robots and humans. When no-one is directly interacting with Craig he gives himself prep-talks in an attempt to boost confidence for the inevitable social encounter. As Craig sees someone approaching him, all his confidence fades and he is unable to speak, retreating into himself as he is gripped by social paralysis; Craig no longer activates any of his lights or solenoids, falling silent. If someone gets close enough that Craig is unable to ignore them he does his best to interact. Unfortunately, things go from bad to worse for Craig as he fumbles for the correct words, loudness, and pose to express his thoughts. 	These social situations are sonically realized in the following ways. When Craig is unable to detect someone within eight feet of his position, he will rhythmically trigger his solenoids in sequence at a slow, to moderate, speeds with low velocities. To represent him building confidence the longer no-one is detected the time between strikes will slowly decrease as the strike velocities increase. When Craig detects someone is approaching him, he shuts down and goes silent: only rarely activating one of his solenoids or LED’s. Lastly, if Craig detects someone within two feet of his position he attempts to converse as best he can. As he is inept at articulating his feelings and thoughts, the result is an arrhythmic splattering of loud, abrupt, and inappropriate solenoid strikes accompanied by excessively bright strobing light. 	AntiSocial is the authors first exploration into imbuing human personality traits, in this case shyness and social anxiety, onto a mechatronic entity and is the beginning of the work concerned with mechatronic personalities. This piece is not a musical performance, nor is it an interactive art installation, instead it is a performance of social interaction akin to dramatology which is a field of psychotherapy that seeks to treat all symptoms as valid communications, including words, posture, tone of voice, and movements of the face and limbs.[NV89]5.6.3 Hedonism Bot Figure 39: Ivy Liu feeding  Hedonism Bot during a performance of Hedonism Bot.Hedonism Bot is a musical ritual that is performed in a concert setting. A Model-A mechatronic personality is given the characteristics of “Hedonism Bot”64. Hedonism Bot, throughout the course of the seven-minute structured improvisation, is ‘fed’ the sounds of human performers whom bow to the robot one at a time while presenting sonic offerings. Each time Hedonism Bot feeds on the offerings it attempts to fully initialize its system; it activates its solenoids attempting to jam with the human performers. However for the first few feedings, Hedonism Bot is unable to maintain enough energy to keep playing for longer than a few seconds. As the performance progresses Hedonism Bot gets stronger and is able to play louder and longer with each meal. Eventually, Hedonism Bot has been fed enough to come to life and the social dynamics of the performance shift. Instead of the human performers leading the pace and narrative of the ritual by creating sounds which are then fed into the robot, Hedonism bot takes the musical lead. The robot cycles through its actuators and creates a consistent rhythm while the human performers fade their instruments out. During the last minute of the performance, Hedonism bot guides the audience through an outro without the accompaniment of any other performers.[NV90] Xxx[NV91].5.6.4 No Humans AllowedNo Humans Allowed (NHA) is the final performance discussed in this chapter which utilizes the authors mechatronic personalities. While AntiSocial and Hedonism Bot both only used a single Model-A personality, NHA uses one Model-A personality in addition to two Model-B personalities to create a community of xenophobic robots. Bot becomes AggressiveBot becomes SurveillanceBot becomes ProductiveOther bot is AggressiveNo effectNo effectNo effectOther Bot is SurveillanceNo effectNo effectNo effectOther Bot is ProductiveForces into state of SurveillanceDecreases productivityIncreases productivity levelTable 6: How personality state changes effect the states of other personalities.[NV92]	Similar to the interactions seen in AntiSocial, each of the personalities in NHA have a total of three states: or moods. When no outsiders are detected in the gallery, the personalities are in their productive, happy state. They rhythmically activate their solenoids simulating a fully functioning productive state of mind. If a personality detects an outside presence in the gallery, such as a gallery viewer, their productivity steeply declines as the personality is preoccupied with the outsider and unable to accomplish their daily ‘work’. This mode is the surveillance state or cautious mood. If one of the personalities notices an outsider it alerts the other bots in the community which also enter into a state of surveillance; but with a higher productivity rating65 than the bot who sounded the alarm. The third state, or mood, is activated when an outsider ventures too close to the robot. The personality turns hostile as it flashes its lights, which are primarily dormant in the other states, and slams its solenoids in a disturbingly loud, fast, and arrhythmic way. The hostile personality alerts the other personalities in the gallery to the threat causing them to enter into a state of surveillance with a low productivity rating. 	Just like AntiSocial, NHA is not a musical performance nor is it an installation although with reason it could be classified as such. Instead, it is a performance of social interaction, fear, and isolationism which seeks to invite us to question not only human-robot social interactions but also human-human interactions both on the personal and societal levels.5.7 ConclusionIn this chapter, the authors terms Mechatronic Instrument, Mechatronic Instrumentalist, Mechatronic Personality, and Digital Co-Composer were presented along with the hardware and software of The Pantheon system for mechatronic art. Additionally, five approaches to human-mechatronic performance were discussed through the lenses of mechatronic agency, reactiveness, and human-robot interaction. Each of these approaches were actualized in the form of installations, compositions, and performances which were introduced in each section. While the styles, approaches, hardware, and software employed for each of the performances were varied, the compositions were all conceived, written, and actualized as explorations in the possibilities afforded by mechatronic presence in the performance space. With mechanical and digital entities becoming more and more common on the concert stage and in other performance venues, this body of work hopes to inspire performers to explore new possibilities for human-circuit interaction within the entertainment arena. Chapter 6 Conclusion6.1 SummaryThis document discussed a portion of the work created by Nathan Villicaña-Shaw during his studies as a MFA student at CalArts. The projects presented were ways the author has approached questioning, exploring, and examining human-circuit interaction within the context of performance and installation art. Through the completion of these projects, the author has refined his approach to interaction design not by means of iteration on a singular idea, or approach, but instead by employing a different technique with each project. The multitude of lenses uses to view the same topic of human-circuit interaction, has afforded a clarity in values, approach, and aesthetics to the authors artistic practice. This thesis is not a comprehensive study of interaction design, nor does it intend to present its discoveries with any authority. Instead, it seeks to document years of work spent exploration, pondering, and musing on the implications of the effects that 21st century technology has on our human-circuit interaction modalities.[NV93]6.2 Primary ContributionsThe majority of research in interaction design is conducted by industrial designers, product designers, web engineers, or computer scientists attempting to create easy to use, but flexible, ways to interact with complex hardware or software systems.[4] The corpus of work attempted to break free from the goals of conventional interaction design and to view the field in terms of music performance and installation art. One approach to interaction is not valued over another but instead the goal is to provoke a dialogue into the merits of variety and questioning the status quo.[NV94]6.3 Final ThoughtsThis corpus of work is inspired by the author’s fascination with electricity, magnetism, and how we as humans have harnessed electro-magnetism to run the world around us. In the 21st century, it is nearly impossible to avoid digital technology in the day-to-day grind. The work discussed in this thesis seeks to re-open the discussion of how we interact with electrical systems on the most fundamental way. It hopes to invite participants to ask how their bodies electrical properties coexist and affect the electromagnetic devices that are vital to modern life. The goal of the art presented in this thesis is to invite us to question how we interact not only with electrical systems and digital devices, but with everyone and everything in the world around us. [NV95]Bibliography[1]	N. Wiener, The human use of human beings: cybernetics and society. New York, N.Y: Da Capo Press, 1988.[2]	K. Kwastek, Aesthetics of interaction in digital art. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2013.[3]	W. R. ASHBY, INTRODUCTION TO CYBERNETICS. Place of publication not identified: MARTINO FINE Books, 2015.[4]	B. Moggridge, Designing interactions. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2007.[5]	C. Paul, Digital art, Third edition. London: Thames & Hudson, 2015.[6]	Jay David Bolter and Diane Gromala, Windows and Mirrors: Interaction Design, Digital Art, and the Myth of Transparency. 2003.[7]	B. Wands, Ed., Art of the Digital Age, 1. paperback ed. London: Thames & Hudson, 2006.[8]	“The War of the Currents: AC vs. DC Power,” Energy.gov. [Online]. Available: http://www.energy.gov/articles/war-currents-ac-vs-dc-power. [Accessed: 14-Nov-2016].[9]	C. A. Mack, “Fifty Years of Moore’s Law,” IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 202–207, May 2011.[10]	“Leonardo da Vinci | Italian artist, engineer, and scientist | Britannica.com.” [Online]. Available: https://www.britannica.com/biography/Leonardo-da-Vinci. [Accessed: 15-Feb-2017].[11]	M. E. Moran, “The da Vinci Robot,” J. Endourol., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 986–990, Dec. 2006.[12]	T. J. Misa, Leonardo to the Internet: technology & culture from the Renaissance to the present, 2nd ed. Baltimore [Md.]: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011.[13]	A. M. Fernandez and F. Iazzetta, “Circuit-Bending and the DIY Culture,” Escole Communivações E Artes Universidade São Paulo, 2011.[14]	J. A. Paradiso, J. Heidemann, and T. G. Zimmerman, “Hacking Is Pervasive,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 13–15, Jul. 2008.[15]	Motherboard, Reed Ghazala, the Father of Circuit Bending: Sound Builders. .[16]	“Ghazala.” .[17]	“Circuit_Bending_Build_Your_Own_Alien_Instruments.pdf.” .[18]	“Ghazala.” [Online]. Available: http://www.anti-theory.com/bio/. [Accessed: 15-Feb-2017].[19]	A. Galloway, J. Brucker-Cohen, L. Gaye, E. Goodman, and D. Hill, “Design for hackability,” 2004, p. 363.[20]	A. McPherson and V. Zappi, “Exposing the scaffolding of digital instruments with hardware-software feedback loops,” in Proceedings of the international conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2015, pp. 162–167.[21]	M. A. Net, “Media Art Net | Kubisch, Christina: Sound Flow Light Source – Forty Pillars and One Room,” 05-Oct-2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.medienkunstnetz.de/works/klang-fluss-licht/. [Accessed: 05-Oct-2016].[22]	R. Ghazala, Circuit-bending: build your own alien instruments. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2005.[23]	“Peter Blasser (biography).” [Online]. Available: http://www.fondation-langlois.org/html/e/page.php?NumPage=372. [Accessed: 28-Apr-2017].[24]	A. P. McPherson, A. Chamberlain, A. Hazzard, S. McGrath, and S. Benford, “Designing for Exploratory Play with a Hackable Digital Musical Instrument,” 2016, pp. 1233–1245.[25]	M. Rush and M. Rush, New Media in Art, 2nd ed. London: Thames & Hudson, 2005.[26]	R. Greene, Internet Art. New York, N.Y: Thames & Hudson, 2004.[27]	W. Benjamin, “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,” Film Theory Crit., vol. 4, pp. 665–82, 2006.[28]	L. Maes, G.-W. Raes, and T. Rogers, “The Man and Machine Robot Orchestra at Logos,” Comput. Music J., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 28–48, 2011.[29]	Jim Murphy, Ajay Kapur, and Dale Carnegie, “Musical Robotics in a Loudspeaker World: Developments in Alternative Approaches to Localization and Spatialization,” Leonardo Music J., vol. 22, pp. 41–48, 2012.[30]	A. Kapur and M. Darling, “A Pedagogical Paradigm for Musical Robotics.,” in NIME, 2010, pp. 162–165.[31]	A. Kapur, J. Murphy, M. Darling, E. Heep, B. Lott, and N. Morris, “MalletOTon and the Modulets: Modular and Extensible Musical Robots,” New Interfaces Music. Expr., pp. 69–72, 2016.[32]	A. Kapur et al., “The Machine Orchestra,” in ICMC, 2010.[33]	A. Kapur et al., “The Machine Orchestra: An Ensemble of Human Laptop Performers and Robotic Musical Instruments,” Comput. Music J., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 49–63, Dec. 2011.[34]	“Super Nintendo Entertainment System,” Wikipedia. 12-Apr-2017.[35]	J. Ryan, Super Mario: how Nintendo conquered America. New York: Portfolio Penguin, 2011.[36]	D. Adams, The ultimate hitchhiker’s guide: [five complete novels and one story], Complete & unabridged. New York: Gramercy Books, 2005.[37]	“SammyIAm/Moppy: Musical controller for an Arduino-floppy drive set up.” .[38]	“Drive Power Connectors.” .[39]	A. Dunne and F. Raby, Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming. Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London: The MIT Press, 2013.[40]	“Raspberry Pi GPIO Pin information.” [Online]. Available: http://www.thebox.myzen.co.uk/Raspberry/Understanding_Outputs.html. [Accessed: 16-Nov-2016].[41]	M. Puckette and others, “Pure Data: another integrated computer music environment,” Proc. Second Intercollege Comput. Music Concerts, pp. 37–41, 1996.[42]	Microchip, “MCP3008 Datasheet.” Microchip, 02-Jan-2008.[43]	“PAM8403.pdf.” .[44]	A. Kapur, “A History of Robotic Musical Instruments.,” presented at the International Computer Music Conference, 2005, vol. 31.[45]	G. Weinberg and S. Driscoll, “Toward Robotic Musicianship,” Comput. Music J., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 28–45, 2006.[46]	G. Wang, P. R. Cook, and S. Salazar, “Chuck: A Strongly Timed Computer Music Language,” Comput. Music J., 2016.[47]	G. Wang, A. Misra, A. Kapur, and P. R. Cook, “Yeah, ChucK it!⇒ dynamic, controllable interface mapping,” in Proceedings of the 2005 conference on New interfaces for musical expression, 2005, pp. 196–199.[48]	G. Wang, R. Fiebrink, and P. R. Cook, “Combining Analysis and synthesis in the Chuck Programming Language.,” presented at the International Computer Music Conference, 2007.[49]	P. R. Cook, S. Salazar, A. Kapur, G. Wang, and C. Reas, Eds., Programming for Musicians and Digital Artists: Creating Music with ChucK. Shelter Island: Manning, 2015.[50]	“Open SoundControl: A New Protocol for Communicating with Sound Synthesizers.” [Online]. Available: http://cnmat.org/ICMC97/papers-html/OpenSoundControl.html. [Accessed: 04-Mar-2017].[51]	Y. A. Badamasi, “The Working Principle of an Arduino,” 2014, pp. 1–4.[52]	F. Leens, “An introduction to I2C and SPI protocols,” IEEE Instrum. Meas. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 8–13, Feb. 2009.[53]	M. Margolis, Arduino cookbook. Sebastopol, Calif.: O’Reilly, 2012.[54]	Alpha & Omega Semiconductor Inc., “AOT460.pdf.” .[55]	P. Scherz and S. Monk, Practical Electronics for Inventors, Third edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2013.[56]	Toshiba, “ULN2803A Datasheet.pdf.” Toshiba, 03-Dec-2010.[57]	B. Schrader, Introduction to electro-acoustic music. Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall, 1982.[58]	A. Lerch, Audio Content Analysis: an Introduction. Hoboken, N.J: Wiley, 2012.1 Paleontology is the branch of science concerned with fossil animals and plants.2 Ichnology is the branch of geology and biology that deals with traces of organismal behavior, such as footprints and burrows. 3 An anemometer is an instrument for measuring the speed of the wind, or of any current of gas.4 Including a robotic knight built in 1495 that was capable of sitting down, standing up, moving its head and lifting its visor.[11]5 saper vedere – “knowing how to see”: Leonardo believed that one’s eyes were the main avenue to knowledge and the skill of observation is of vital importance to any great scientist. 6 The second printing in 2009 specifically.7 He is editor-in-chief of the Leonardo Music Journal, and a Professor in the Department of Sound at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. 8 The Potsdamer Platz is an important public square and traffic intersection in the center of Berlin, Germany, lying about 1 km south of the Brandenburg Gate and the German parliament building, and close to the southeast corner of the Tiergarten park.9 Christina used the term ‘electrical walk’ to describe the action of exploring a space’s EM properties by means of EM listening just as one might go on a nature walk. For her, the Electrical Walks are not only for other people to enjoy, but are also an activity she enjoys to do. 10 The Retrono, Discovery Synth, Voltage Slammer, and Modular SNES interfaces presented in Chapter 4 are examples.11 Founded in 1970 with Moniek Darge.12 Founded in 1968/1969. Current 2017 members are Godfreid-Williem Raes, Moniek Darge, Karin De Fielyt, Marc Maes, Stefaan Smagghe, Kris De Baerdemacker, and Kristof Lauwers. 13 All are actuated with solenoid beaters. The crash symbol has two dampening mechanisms. The snare has a brush, which can be rubbed on the membrane, as well as a beater.14 The glasses, xylophone, cymbals and drums are directly struck by tubular push-pull solenoids. The guitar and bass strings each have their own picking mechanism, a string dampener, and five possible fret positions.15 Although Digital Rain was reactive to the worlds current weather conditions it was unaffected by human activity inside and outside of the gallery.16 A rail shooter limits the player to directing where to fire a gun or move his avatar around the screen. The player is unable to control the path they take or explore the environment. Examples of games that belong to the rail shooter genera include: The House of the Dead 1, 2, 3, and 4; Star Fox 64; Virtua Cop 1, 2, and 3; Time Crisis 1, 2, 3, and 4; just to name a few. 17 In video game design a game is considered to be “on-rail” if the manner the player travels is pre-determined on a line, as if literally on rails. This originally was done to allow for the use of high production backgrounds and higher quality pre-rendered graphics. Over time this technical approach to game design has become a stylistic one that still persists today. Examples of games that are on-rail include the Star Fox, Time Crisis, and The House of the Dead series.18 This helps with steps II, II and IV.19 Helping with steps II and III.20 Helping with steps I, III, and V.21 This primarily aids with step V by encouraging viewers to walk into the network of cables and to explore the interior of the space.22 Helping with I and II in the interaction rail.23 Helping with II and III in the interaction rail.24 Cathode Ray Tubes was initially exhibited in the WaveCave Gallery at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia California from April 5th, 2016 through April 11th, 2016. Subsequently, the installation has been shown at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo and was installed in the Kadenze Inc. corporate headquarters in Valencia, California from May 2016 through May 2017.25 The program will separate the red, green, and blue channels from one other and average each channel over all the pixels in the image.26 https://www.python.org/27 Do It Yourself – The method of building, modifying or repairing things without the direct aid of experts or professionals28 Printed Circuit Boards29 A Cape for a Raspberry Pi is similar to what a Shield is to the Arduino. It Is a small printed circuit board that is designed to be attached to the GPIO headers of the Raspberry Pi and provides some sort of additional functionality usually though the use of IC’s and/or discrete electrical components.30 Normally this is someone pressing the button with their finger, but can also be pulling a lever, walking on a tile, or many other types of interaction events.31 Skin is one of the most resistive types of tissue in the human body with resistance of over 100,000 ohms in some cases, as oppose to our internal body resistance averaging around 300 ohms. As result, the DS’s button circuitry utilized 10Mohm resistors for pull downs to account for the overall circuit resistance.32 Kanthal A-1 is a resistance heating wire commonly used for the heating element for electronic cigarettes. Kanthal is a ferritic iron-chromium-aluminum allow – FeCrAl alloy – and is characterized by high resistivity and good oxidation resistance.33 Or 51mA current draw from all GPIO pins over the entire device.34 Such as Super Mario Brothers, or Zelda – Link to the Past. [TODO – incluke DK and dates, and real names.35 Such as Killer Instinct, Mario Cart, and Bomberman. [TODO]36 A First In First Out buffer is a type of circular buffer that continually rewrites over the oldest values with the newest values.37 Examples include color-separated Perlin noise masks, vertical gradients, horizontal gradients, image masks, and video feedback.38 A black box is a device or system that is viewed in terms of its transfer characteristics (inputs and outputs) without any knowledge of its internal workings.39 The PAM8403 is a 3 watt, Class-D, stereo amplifier that is common and inexpensive.40 Allowing them to be powered directly with a Lithium-ion battery.41 Budget interconnection company that is cost effective alternative to Molex. Most commonly seen with battery jacks and plugs in hobbyist projects.42 I do not recommend anyone does this themselves.43 Pulse Wave Modulation: a type of high frequency digital signal that allows the user to adjust the duty cycle in effect adjusting the average voltage over the line: emulating an analog signal.44 Red, Green and Blue45 Single pole single throw: a switch that has two states and one channel46 Red, Green and Blue47 Single pole single throw: a switch that has two states and one channel48 Pulse Wave Modification: A high frequency digital signal that has a variable duty cycle allowing for a pseudo variable voltage.49 Application Program Interface: a set of routines, protocols, and tools for building software applications. An API specifies how software components should interact. 50 Sporking a shred in ChucK creates a non-blocking concurrent sub-process that runs on the same virtual machine as the host program.51 Both of the Model-A and Model-B mechatronic personalities used in No Humans Allowed use five Arduino microcontrollers each.52 UDP or User Datagram Protocol is one of the core members of the internet protocol suite which allows computer applications to send messages over the internet to other hosts.53 Arduino shields are modular circuit boards that piggyback onto a specific Arduino model instilling the microcontroller with added functionality.54 For control of solenoids, DC motors, LED strips or other two-lead DC actuators.55 Manufactured by Alpha and Omega Semiconductor Inc.56 SR-04 Ultrasonic Rangefinders are a common sensor in my interfaces, installations, and mechatronics due to its cost efficiency and availability.57 note level vs. score level vs. clip level58 Often times the composer is not on stage during the performance and/or does not introduce the work, further focusing audience attention on the technology and and decentralizing their attention.59 Not an impossibility for human performers, but much harder to realize.60 Performed fall 2015 with Eric Heep and Daniel Clarke in the CalArts Machine Lab.61 Performed fall 2016 with Kyle McCarthy, Ivy Liu, and Jake Turpin in the CalArts Machine Lab.62 CalArts 2016 – MFA MTIID Alum63 CalArts 2016 – MFA Composition Alum64 Inspired by the opulent, decadent, out-of-touch roman czar inspired Futurama robotic character that is only concerned with food, debauchery, and pleasure.65 A higher productivity rating will result in an average of more actuator activations that a lower rating.[NV1]intro had four sections:intro - 4 paragraphs, funnel down to thesis statement.-motivation - personal and in the field.-define overviewthen outline (with the singular picture as well)- interaction in gallery art is becoming more and more common- Often how we [NV2]Who are you? We’re immediately concerned about you +/or your work?[NV3][TODO add sentence about being fascinated at how we have harnessed magnetism and electricity.[NV4][Xxxxx, xxx and xxx, something about cybernetics. TODO][NV5][TODO, talk about birth of the field of interaction design.][NV6][xxxx something about the rise of digital art and how this thesis presents digital art which is a perfect medium for interactive art. TODO[NV7]Expand on this, what gallery?[NV8]TODO - Make this talk about a specific device, make it relatable.[NV9]TODO – so this needs to be rewritten[NV10][TODO so what?, what does that mean for interface design, what does that mean for designing for hackability, what does that mean for this thesis?][NV11]TODO - What status quo, is there a problem, perhaps this sould be worded so it is not so terrible?[NV12]TODO - Should reword? Or perhaps give an example of the airline industry or another industry that is stagnated because things work good enough. Necessity is the mother of invention. (now there are so many  necessities ?!?)[NV13]TODO - QWERTY needs to be expanded upon further and separated from this sentence.[NV14]TODO - Replace with a version that shows the installations I have that tie in with the spectrum TODO[NV15][TODO] – what?!?[NV16]Expand upon this perhaps, or reword, why is this good why do people care.[NV17]So what and who cares? Talk about how his work ethic and openness to embrace whatever challenges and disciples come his way he tackles it head on with an open mind and heart. With the same determination and drive.[NV18]Need some sort of transition into this section.[NV19]Add sentence about hardware hacking as intro, and perhaps something else TODO[NV20]So what, who cares, where does this come from? TODO. Add one or two of Nicolas’s installations and/or performances to show why I like/care about his work.[NV21]TODO - Reed Ghazala comes out of no-where here.[NV22][TODO, how is did he approach different? Why does it matter?][NV23][TODO, more about opportunistic design and exploratory development, or let it be absorbed by another section].[NV24][TODO cite the Theremin][NV25][TODO talk about iPhone, touchkeys, and capacitive sensing (colins work?)].[NV26]I p bio on him - TODO[NV27]Fucked, turn into something?[NV28][NV28]TODO[NV29][NV29]TODO[NV30]Make sure her credentials are correct.[NV31]Should this be changed to Mechatronics? And then it talks about the history of mechatronics. It would have a subsection about mechatronic music that takes up the bulk of it…[NV32]This entire “intro” section needs to be looked at again…[NV33][NV33]TODO[NV34]Word less terribly perhaps?[NV35]Better vocab?[NV36]What is this sentence attempting to say?[NV37]What am I attempting to say here?[NV38][TODO, find performance of him naked with the bots].[NV38]        [NV39][TODO – add more about why Raes: his performances, his loving care-free approach, while 1maintaining an academic rigor.[NV40]TODO – make this not crap perhaps?!? Talk about the works of Trimpin that are influential to my practice and why. Then talk about meeting Trimpin and working with Trimpin.[NV41][TODO sentence about advantages of musical robots in the loudspeaker world for citation 28[NV42]Better picture of the Machine Orchestra perhaps? TODO[NV43]Expand on the impact it has had on the work presented – how most of the performances took place in the Machine Lab using the Machine Orchestra - TODO[NV44]TODO figure out origin of and name of proper term to describe these games.[NV45]Need more for this introduction, is this true?Should I talk about how “disceptive art” is usually in reference to optical illusions such as http://www.huhmagazine.co.uk/6616/deceptive-art-installation-by-jeroen-bisscheroux[NV46]TODO – cite something perhaps?[NV47]TODO  - erm, what?[NV48]TODO - This needs quotes, author? Etc…[NV49]TODO – review all of this junk[NV50]TODO - OK cool, but why?[NV51]TODO - Should I talk about any positive aspects to this design? TODO revisit this paragraph[NV52][TODO – how does it work, what do all of the inputs and output do?]. – expand this section[NV53]TODO - Perhaps talk about its controls, or lack of controls?[NV54]TODO[NV55]TODO - Review[NV56]TODO: also add picture of an example output from the interface.[NV57]TODO - Should this section be cut?[NV58]TODO this introduction needs to mention OneToFour as well.. [NV59]TODO – add a few sentances about advanages of encoders, and the advent of buttons and leds especially in the installation environment.[NV60]TODO - What? Where does this go? TODO[NV61]TODO - Review all this crap… TODO[NV62]TODO – Review again[NV63]TODO – Who cares? Why is this here?[NV64][TODO – why not then just call it a robotic musical instrument?][NV65]TODO: sentence about existing examples of mechatronic instrumentalists[NV66]TODO - Need more examples of mechatronic personalities - Other examples include xxx and xxxxx designed by Eric Heep in 2015-16. And that one robot that has someones personality literally downloaded for you. Also give chatbots as an example?[NV67]Make a list of example digital co-composers? Or simple expand this section some more.[NV68]TODO - This needs to be updated to more accurately reflect the current state of things….[NV69]TODO - Is this confusing and even needed? why do we care? Why is it in here?[NV70]TODO - Will add picture of Arduino with shield on top next to the circuit diagram.[NV71]TODO - clean this up and possibly include other aspects of the circuitry?[NV72]TODO – ok, why?, research the datasheet and make sure that what I am saying here is real and worth saying…[NV73]TODO – picture of the two different versions of the board, talk about the two different versions in the paragraph that discusses the boards.[NV74]TODO -  replace picture, this one is ugly as shit!, add picture of the board on an actual Arduino…[NV75]TODO – clunky and weird intro, perhaps make it not so?[NV76]Better picture on the way[NV77]TODO – who?!?[NV78]TODO – perhaps more should be said?[NV79]This section is going to be rewritten after I update the composition to use windbot as well.[NV80]Where I be - TODO[NV81][TODO] Listen to the piece and finish describing what is going on.[NV82]TODO – need to add section about what is going on with the composition, how is it structured, etc…[NV83]TODO – this all spirals into nothingness, need to fix it up[NV84]Image for this coming soon…[NV85]Talk more about the motivations behind writing the peice[NV86]Clean up this section – TODO[NV87]This where I be…[NV88]TODO- need a transitin sentence to lead into this – about how the sound is made in the gallery perhaps?[NV89]TODO – perhaps expand upon this?        [NV90]This is the performance where we feed the bot. Talk about the dangers of the performance space and how it forced us to “wizard of Oz” the live performance. The following citation covers the Wizard of Oz effect.[6, pp. 43–44][NV91]TODO – perhaps add more about why and who cares?[NV92]I know this table is a mess, will clean it up, and possibly add in another with the actions during each of the states.[NV93]TODO – clunky, rewrite me please[NV94]TODO – should there be more here?[NV95]Am I saying the same thing three times? - TODO--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------xvi