California Institute of the ArtsElectromagnetic Translucenceartistic approaches to interaction design for installations, interfaces, and mechatronic performancebyNathan Villicaña-ShawA thesis submitted in partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Fine ArtsHerb Alpert School of MusicMusic Technology: Interaction, Intelligence & Design2017
Supervisory CommitteeAjay Kapur, Ph.D							MentorOwen Vallis, Ph.D			   			     Committee MemberSpencer Salazar, Ph.D							Committee Member

AbstractThis thesis presents a variety of approaches for complicating, simplifying or exposing human- circuit interaction within the context of interactive installation art, interface design, and mechatronic performance. After a brief background of related work, this thesis presents several different approaches to human-circuit interaction in the gallery with example installations. Next, a variety of different approaches to electronic interface design are presented along with their corresponding motivations. A sampling of mechatronic performances and a contextualization of some of the previously discusses works are discussed in the next section. After the Conclusion an appendix is included to provide a sampling of code, implementation, construction, and secondary themes.      The primary goals of this work include (1) presenting a corpus of work that is concerned with human-circuit interaction modalities (2) exploring the creation and dissolution of abstractions separating us from circuitry (3) exploring the idea of mechatronic/electronic personalities (4) exploring performances that feature mechatronic performers performing for a mechatronic audience.
AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank my loving, and supportive, family that have always believed in my abilities and have given me the freedom to explore what interests me. My mentors, Ajay Kapur and Owen Vallis who have always had my best interest in mind and who have given me the chance to prove myself and my abilities.      I would also like to thank all the professors, instructors, and faculty at CalArts who have guided, inspired, and motivated me throughout the past four years. Tom Jennings for helping me to break free from the technology in my art. Sarah Roberts for helping me to start thinking about space, sound, and interaction in new ways. Spencer Salazar, for his calm wisdom. Clay Chaplin for embracing me as one of his own students.      I would also like to thank all the friends and colleagues that I have studied, collaborated, and learned with throughout the years. Special thanks to Mason for inspiring me to think in larger scale, and for his respectful grace as an artist and human. Peter Blasser, Evelina Dominitch, Dimitry Gelfand, Mike Leize, Shaurja Benaurje.      There are Artists and Scientists who I do not know personally but have been a deep influence in my studies. Leonardo Da Vinci, Nicola Tesla, Elon Musk,       Wolfgang, my dear friend, who is longer with us for his friendship, support, and talks.       Those who I lost contact with but influenced me artistically: John Meagher, Jarred xxx, Pat xxxx, Keith Bishop, Tessa Bishop, xxx, xxx, xxx.
ContentsAbstract	vAcknowledgments	viiContents	ixList of Figures	xvList of Tables	1Chapter 1	Introduction	41.1	Interaction in 21st Century Art	41.2	Philosophy for Hardware Development	51.3	Artistic Constraints	61.4	Thesis Overview & Outline	6Chapter 2	Background	72.1	Electromagnetic Spectrum	82.2	The Artist Scientist	92.3	Circuit Bending & Hardware Hacking	102.3.1	Reed Ghazala and Circuit Bending	112.3.2	Nicholas Collins – Hardware Hacking	122.4	Tapping into Electromagnetic Systems	132.4.1	Christina Kubisch	132.5	Exposing the Circuitry	152.5.1	Peter Blasser	162.6	Mechatronic Music	172.6.1	Trimpin	172.6.2	Godfried-Willem Raes	182.6.3	The Machine Orchesta	19Chapter 3	Human Circuit Interaction in the Gallery	213.1	Interaction Rails	233.1.1	Electrical Box – Installation Description	233.1.2	Approach to Interaction	243.2	Open Interaction	273.2.1	Cathode Ray Tubes - Installation Description	283.2.2	Interaction Design	283.3	Deception	293.3.1	Symbiotic SNES	293.3.2	6 * 9 = 42	293.4	Unwelcoming Spaces	293.4.1	No Humans Allowed: Installation Description	303.4.2	No Humans Allowed – Interaction Design	313.5	Non-Interactive	313.5.1	Digital Rain – Dynamic	323.5.2	Computer Music – Deterministic	333.6	Conclusion	34Chapter 4	Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCI	354.1	Introduction	Error! Bookmark not defined.4.2	Abstractive/Deconstruction	374.2.1	Discovery Synth: Project Overview	374.2.2	Buttons	374.2.3	Potentiometers	Error! Bookmark not defined.4.3	Comoflodge and Exposure	404.3.1	Camouflage and Exposure	Error! Bookmark not defined.4.4	Re-Appropriation of Conventions	414.4.1	Modular SNES: Project Description	414.5	Deception	414.5.1	Symbiotic SNES: Project Description	414.5.2	“6 x 9 = 42” and the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot – Interface Description	434.5.3	CTSB – Interaction Design	434.6	Removing Agency	444.6.1	Eavesdropper – Interface Description	454.6.2	Eavesdropper - Interaction Design	454.7	Orchestrating Circuitry	464.7.1	The Voltage Slammer - Interface Description	474.7.2	The Voltage Slammer – Interaction Design	484.7.3	OneToFour – Interface Description	484.7.4	OneToFour - Interaction Design	494.8	Conclusion	49Chapter 5	Approaches to Human-Robot Performance	505.1	Mechatronic Instruments, Instrumentalists, Personalities, and Digital Co-Composers	515.1.1	Mechatronic Instruments	515.1.2	Mechatronic Instrumentalist	515.1.3	Mechatronic Personality	525.1.4	Digital Co-Composers	525.2	Mechatronic Instruments played by Humans	525.2.1	Robots Improvisational Jam	535.3	Mechatronic Instruments playing “Headless”	535.3.1	Beatles	545.3.2	Hello Humans	545.4	Humans Leading Intelligent Mechatronics	555.4.1	Robot Whispers - Performance Description	565.4.2	Hello Humans	Error! Bookmark not defined.5.4.3	Hedonism Bot – Performance Description	575.5	Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves	575.5.1	Computer Music – As a Performance	585.5.2	Antisocial – As a Performance	Error! Bookmark not defined.5.6	Mechatronic Communities	585.6.1	No Humans Allowed	585.7	Conclusion	58Chapter 6	Conclusion	596.1	Summary	596.2	Primary Contributions	606.3	Final Thoughts	60Chapter 7	Appendix	617.1	Pantheon Mechatronic System	617.1.1	Server	617.1.2	Shields	627.2	Embracing the Mechatronics – Compositional Considerations	667.3	Project Backgrounds	Error! Bookmark not defined.7.3.1	Retrono – Virtue of Experimentation	Error! Bookmark not defined.7.4	Technical Notes	677.4.1	Electrical Box - EavesDroppers	677.4.2	Modular SNES – Technical Details	Error! Bookmark not defined.7.4.3	Discovery Synth – Technical Details	687.4.4	Symbiotic SNES - Technical Details	697.4.5	Voltage Slammer - Technical Details	707.4.6	Computer Music - Additional Notes	71Bibliography	72
List of FiguresFigure 1: Leonardo DaVinci – Self-portrait, chalk, 1512 on left:	9Figure 2: Bent Fest 2012	10Figure 3: Reed Ghalzala with pet Raccoon	11Figure 4: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.	12Figure 5: Christina Kubisch with one of her listening devices.	14Figure 6: Peter Blasser paper circuit with paper dissolved.	16Figure 7: The Man and Machine robot orchestra.	18Figure 8: The Machine Orchestra.	19Figure 9: Required interaction for Electrical Box.	24Figure 10: EB spacial layout.	25Figure 11: One of two Listening Stations	26Figure 12: Cathode Ray Tubes - 3 unit version.	28Figure 13: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo.	32Figure 14: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo.	33Figure 15: Discovery Synth	37Figure 16: Second version of the Retrono Synthesizers	40Figure 17: Eavesdropper from outside	45Figure 18: The Voltage Slammer	46Figure 19: Composition for Robots 2014 final improvisational jam.	53Figure 20: Brigid Actuator Shield.	63Figure 21: Single Actuator Channel	64Figure 22: Homados Actuator Shield	64Figure 23: Hermes Stepper Driver	65Figure 24: Theia 1.0 - General purpose sensor board.	66Figure 25: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronics	67Figure 26: Modular SNES, first of three designs.	Error! Bookmark not defined.
List of TablesTable 1: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities	36Chapter 1 Introduction[NV1]I am captivated by the power of the electromagnetic spectrum. I am fascinated at the different ways we, as human beings, have developed technology to harness, control, and leverage the awesome power of this spectrum of energy. Likewise, I love analyzing and examining how we have constructed interfaces to interact with electrical systems. These muses are the source of the installations, inrefaces, and performances presented in this thesis. Our societal and personal relationship with electricity is complex, strange, ever changing and a constant source of inspiration for me.1.1 	Interaction in 21st Century Art(this sections is attempting to set a background of human-electronics interaction). The cybernetic text The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society, published in 1950 by Norbert Weiner was the first writting that focused research onto human interaction.[1], [2]. With the rise of computer technology and the internet the field of interaction design further developed and flourished. [3] Now interaction in the gallery is common-place, and some would even argue is passe. This thesis hopes to vitalize an interest in exploring different ways to create spaces and objects that facilitate interaction in new, or interesting ways. We are entering into a new epoch where how we interact with technology is changing as many of our devices begin to exhibit traits of intelligence. As our devices begin to be able to answer back, talk to you, hold up its end of a conversation they are no longer simply inanimate tools, but instead take on an extra property. 1.2 Philosophy for Hardware DevelopmentThe authors approach for developing the hardware and software used in the installations, interfaces, and projects presented in this document is to first begin with a research phase. This is the time where the goal is to learn as much about the low-level technology as possible.  This begins with a few weeks digging deep into the topic both theoretically, by reading about the technology, as well as physically, by building prototypes and conducting experiments. The mechanisms are first approached from the lowest level and then the project works upwards.        For instance, when learning how to design and manufacture printed circuit boards, I spent many months experimenting with etching my own copper clad utilizing various DIY1 and hobbyist approaches before I learned proper circuit design using EAGLE CAD and PCB2 fabrication houses.  When the low level experimental prototypes fail and I understand the reasons why; I take a step back and see if there is anything I can do to simplify my technical approach.  I repeat the process over and over again until I am confident in my chosen approach: completing the research phase. Next I begin the development process.  Incorporating aesthetics, I start developing a production design that both functions as I intended and looks good.[NV2]1.3 Removal from ElectricityIn 2016 we are very removed from electricity and circuitry in its raw ‘natural’ form. In our daily lives, we generally press a button or interact with another form of abstraction that then operates on the circuitry that is always hidden from view. It is rare that we find ourselves in a situation where we are directly interacting with circuitry or electricity. This has been the case since the introduction of electrical systems. This is with good reason; electrical energy has the capacity to harm us physically.  Since the War of the Currents starting in the late 1890’s between Tesla and Edison, where public electrocutions of animals and pets were performed in the streets, electricity has been associated with danger and death to a large portion of the population.       In almost all cases we are concerned with the result of electronic work instead of the electricity itself. For example, the computer I am typing my thesis on right now, which uses electrical energy to conduct its computations, is more useful than the electrical arcs bursting out of a Tesla Coil: even though the Coil consumes orders of magnitude more electricity than my laptop.  To give another example, the lightbulb that is hanging above me right now is functional as a result of the light produced by the electrical work done on the filament: the electricity itself is not directly providing us with light, instead, the light is a byproduct of heat produced by current flowing inside the bulb.1.4 Artistic ConstraintsAs an installation artist, I am both interested in complicating as well as simplifying our most common electronic interaction modalities. The majority of my installations and research prior to Electrical Box (EB) explored simplifying our relationship with electricity by removing abstractions and presenting more direct interaction with circuitry. EB, instead, complicates our relationship with the radio by inserting additional steps into the signal chain, forcing us to navigate additional abstraction layers.      The following list of constraints I have applied to my work as an installation artist.• Never tell the visitor what to do.• The work must complicate or simplify an electro-magnetic system to bring light the systems inherent properties.• The work never explains itself, but leaves itself open to the search for interpretation.1.5 Thesis Overview & Outline
Chapter 2 BackgroundThe installations, performances, and interfaces presented in this Thesis have been inspired by a variety of different artists, movements, and ideas. This chapter provides a history of artists, scientists and ideas that were essential to the genesis of my research as an artist to provide a context for the projects presented. These artists have influenced my artistic practice in a multitude of ways.      Ernest Edmonds, Professor of Computation and Creative Media at the University of Technology in Sydney, noted “art becomes interactive when audience participation is an integral part of the artwork. In making interactive art, the artist goes beyond considerations of how the work will look or sound to an observer. The way that it interacts with the audience is also a crucial part of its essence.”[NV3]2.1 Electromagnetic SpectrumThe electromagnetic spectrum encompases the Radio, microwave, infared, visible light, ultraviolet, x-ray, gamma ray and cosmis ray wavelengths. 2.2 The Artist ScientistFigure 1: Leonardo DaVinci – Self-portrait, chalk, 1512 on left:Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci was an Italian painter, inventor, engineer, writer, astronomer, mathematician, sculpture, and overall renaissance badass. He is known as the father of paleontology, ichnology, and architecture. He lived from April 15 , 1452 to May 2, 1519 and, more than any other historical figure, epitomized the renaissance humanist artist-scientist.[4] Point out connection between inter-discipline practice and innovation.Point out we are in a time of accelerated renaissance and it is vitally important to adopt a modern version of the renaissances man.saper vedere – “knowing how to see”: Leonardo believed that one’s eyes were the main avenue to knowledge. 2.3 Circuit Bending & Hardware HackingFigure 2: Bent Fest 2012The circuit bending and hardware hacking communities are of interest primarily due to their approach to interfacing with electronic devices as well as electricity itself. Circuit Bending and Hardware Hacking are both strange, anti-social, punk anarchistic pastimes.[5, p. -] Often times these hobbies employ a knowledge-on-demand approach to electronics where they learn enough to not hurt themselves, and to have fun. Usually people who embark of the craft of circuit bending do so more for the process and the artifact that is the result than the practical use of the finished object. The spirit of fun, play, exploration, and practical knowledge of hacking and hackers are principles that are paramount to the work discussed in this thesis.[6]2.3.1 Reed Ghazala and Circuit BendingFigure 3: Reed Ghalzala with pet RaccoonMr. Ghazala is often referred to as the ‘father’ of circuit bending, although I believe that perhaps a more befitting title is the first face of circuit bending. Nothing against Reed, but, to his own admittance his stumbled upon circuit bending in a manner that can only be described as naively coincidental. He experienced an event that thousands of people have experienced before but just so happened to be just the right kind of nerd to explore the reason why. He was an explorer in his own right. Ghazala set the tone for the movement, he was no scientist, he did not do well in school and to be honest does not produce the most interesting circuit bent devices, he was a hippy, a rebel. The idea that it is okay to break something, the idea that you can start a project without knowing what you will end up doing or create is very appealing to be. The idea that you can start doing something that you don’t know anything about and can figure it out as you go is really empowering and my main take away from the circuit bending movement.  [7]–[9][10][9][8][7][6][5] 2.3.2 Nicholas Collins – Hardware HackingFigure 4: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.The fact that I only did one project out of Nicolas Collins book and never even finished is a testament to how it changed my life. It is what I tell student artists to go out and buy when they come to me for tutoring in electronics because I never finished it. I tried, several times, it’s just too good. Coming from the academic world Nicholas approached things somewhat differently than Reed3. [TODO insert background on Nicholas Collins]. With his feet firmly set in the academic world Collins brings a certain integrity to the field of hardware hacking and circuit bending that was not there before his work[NV4]. [11], [12] Designing for hackability is paramount to my approach to interface design.  Design for hackability encourages designers and non-designers to critically and creatively explore interactivity, technology and media - to reclaim authorship and ownership of technologies and the social and cultural worlds in which we live. Hackability implies more than customization or adaptation - it calls for redefinition. In a world where technologies are increasingly mobile and invisible, designing for hackability means allowing and encouraging people to make technologies be what they want them to be. [13]	Although applying these principles to interfaces is not new, in the current age of hyper personalization and increasing technological literacy these approachs are important to investigate.[14]	 2.4 Tapping into Electromagnetic SystemsIn addition to hacking into and subverting electromagnetic systems2.4.1 Christina KubischA truly multidiscipline artist, Christina Bubisch (b 1948) studied electronic music at the Milan Conservatory of music but was unsatisfied with how ‘conventional’ her classes were and what she was required to learn. She decided to enroll in the Technical University in Milan and began to take classes in electronics. As described in an interview for cabinet magazine Christina describes how she stumbled upon, what has become her magnum opus. “One day I bought a telephone amplifier, a little cube that you could put next to your telephone so that you could hear it without having the receiver in your hand. The cube was switched on, and when I came into the laboratory, it started to make really strange sounds in my handbag. I took it out and asked my professor what was going on. He explained to me that there were coils in this little cube, and that they picked up some of the machines in the room. It was like a flash in my mind. It was exactly at the time when I wanted to get away from performance and start producing installations.”      She goes on to explain how her excitement over the technology commanded her installation configurations.“In my early installations, there were people wandering around with these little cubes in their hands, walking along thick electrical cables that had sounds running through them. I didn’t think about using the sounds of the outside world. I had no idea about electricity in general or that it could make interesting sounds. I just used the system of electromagnetic induction as a way of amplifying musical sounds.”      After five years she started working with an Italian headphone manufacturing company and commissioned 20 custom headphones with her electromagnetic snooping technology installed inside of large soviet headphones. She made several installations showcasing the custom headphones but eventually the set got destroyed/stolen and she shelved the project. Almost a decade later she found a sponsor that would her help to develop the technology and create a new/better system, in 1999 at the Potsdamer Platz in Berlin she used the new system in a large installation” Forty Pillars and One Room” in a large parking garage. She wrapped lengths of cables covered in green phosphorescent paint around forty of the free standing pillars in the parking garage creating the trunks of trees as seen from underground. Each of the pillars emitted a different sequence of tones: with all of them sharing the common theme of water. The participants particular sonic experience was dependent on their position within the space and the specific time of day [15]. Forty Pillars and One Room interestingly uses electricity and concrete to create a world of implied nature. The sounds Christina curated created a sonic landscape in direct juxtaposition to the electrical and industrial materials she used for construction.Figure 5: Christina Kubisch with one of her listening devices.The Electromagnetic installation work of Berlin based artist Christina Kubisch (b. 1948) creates an intimate experience that can be shared by many people at the same time. She uses technology at the installations core but she does not shove the technology into your face, and infact abstains for telling you too much about the wonders at hand. At the same time the technology is necessary to tell the narrative and impart the experience it is attempting to enforce.       In 2004, Kubisch officially began exhibiting works under the umbrella name of Electrical Walks4. Her Electrical Walks, although closely related to her previous work, featured different source material. Instead of planting electromagnetic signals in wiring that people were tasked with listening to via her devices, she decided to allow the environment to create the fields for her. When researching for a new walk, she embarks into an urban center with an EM listening device. She walks around the city and maps the magnetic activity. She constructs EM maps after thoroughly exploring all of the surrounding areas. The maps show areas of sonic interest and suggest routes to tour the cities magnetic features. Copies are made and handed out to the public along with her custom built magnetic field listeners. 2.5 Exposing the CircuitrySeveral of the interfaces discussed in this thesis seek to expose electrical systems both physically and functionally. The idea of designing electrical systems with the intention of them being interfaced with our human bodies has been around for quite a while. From the early circuit bending technique of “Laying Hands”[16] utilizing our bodies electrical properties to influence an electrical system is not new. The approach that Peter Blasser takes to designing his instruments with that interaction from the beginning, however, is new.Figure 6: Peter Blasser paper circuit with paper dissolved.2.5.1 Peter BlasserIn a world dominated by rigid rules and equations it is refreshing to enter into Peters unique take on circuit design with his paper circuits and point to point soldering. His guide-traces curve and arch around the circuit creating a rats-nest of connections, and possible bridges. About a third of the components values are left to the discretion of the builder and you quickly run into Peters quirky terminology (harry caps, X resistors, etc.). Although it might seem crude and amateurish at the first glance, the instrument is really well designed. It boasts stereo output and an amazing range of possible acoustic manipulation via its inset speakers and resonate properties and, perhaps most importantly, plenty of character. The random components ensure that each birthing of the Old Mr. Grasser sounds different.       I had the pleasure of meeting Peter Blasser at a workshop I attended at CalArts in 2015. Talking to him about his approach to circuit design and building the Old Mr. Grassi synthesizer with him was very influential in my design and approach to the Discovery and Retrono Synthesizers I built later that year. The ideas and approaches of Peter Blasser allowed me to apply circuit bending techniques and approaches to circuit intersection into premeditated projects. It allowed me to justify the bridging of those two worlds. Peters circuits are unstable, unpredictable and full of character. His electronic diagrams are hand drawn using his own symbols for many components and often times specific values are not specified but instead a suggested range is given for a component. While instrument builders such as Andres McPherson with his xxxx have also explored designing devices with the intention of unpredictability, exploration, and hackability from the onset McPhersons, and others, designs tend to obscure the underlying circuitry.[17]2.6 Mechatronic MusicI compose performances for hybrid human-mechatronic performance ensembles as well as design and build my own mechatronic instruments, instrumentalists, and personalities. My work with mechatronics is deeply influenced by three sources. This sections contextualizes the work of Trimpin, Godfreid Raes, and the Machine Orchestra within my own artistic practice and research in human-circuit interaction.2.6.1 TrimpinTrimpin is a kinesthetic sculpture, mechatronic inventor, and installation artist based out of Seattle, Washington. Throughout his inspirational carrer he has maintained his personality, ethics, morals, and artistic integrity throughout his work. He is humble and always willing to teach you the wonders of mechanics. Trimpin has guided my work with building some mechatronic instruments and I have had the pleasure to maintain several of his creations throughout my tenure at CalArts.2.6.2 Godfried-Willem Raes Figure 7: The Man and Machine robot orchestra.Godfried-Willem Raes is the mastermind behind the Man and Machine robot orchestra at the Logos Foundation in Ghent, Belgium.[18] His extensive orchestra of over 45 organ-inspired wind instruments, string instruments, percussion instruments, and noise generators are imbues with extensive character and care.  With the founding of the Logos Foundation in 1968 and their commitment to mechatronic instrument creation and composition in 1990 the Man and Machine orchestra is one of the oldest robotic orchestras in the world.       With the Logos Foundation being foremost a collective of experimental composers and musicians Raes work is centered around writing music specifically to take advantage of the unique capabilities of their unique instruments. Being a concerned as much with the musical output of the machines as their aesthetic or technical qualities Raes is vitally important to my own work composing music for mechatronic ensembles in his adoption of experimental theatrical aspects to some of his performances [TODO, find performance of him naked with the bots].[NV5]2.6.3 The Machine OrchestraFigure 8: The Machine Orchestra.The California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) Machine Lab is the hub of the MTIID department as well as the Digital Arts Minor. Besides being the technological hub for the institute, the Machine lab is home to the Machine Orchestra and the 10 mechatronic instruments the Orchestra consists of.[19]–[21]   The Machine  Orchestra is a mixed ensemble of  human and robotic performers that  combines the musical elements of a laptop ensemble with  the acoustic affordances of robotic instruments.  Over the past xx years the  students and instructors at CalArts have been designing and building  new instruments for the Orchestra as well as repairing and improving old instruments.  Over the past four years I have gotten to know the different instruments in the  Machine Lab, I have repaired, maintained, upgraded, and written music for all of the robots residing in the Machine Lab. The Machine Orchestra  was my introduction into Mechatronics and robotic instrument performance.
Chapter 3 Human-Circuit Interaction in the GalleryIn this chapter, several of the authors installations are presented in terms of their approach to human-circuit interaction in the gallery.  The first section, Interaction Rails, presents Electrical Box as an example of guiding participants through a series of sequential interactions. Next, Open Interaction presents Cathode Ray Tubes as an example of creating an interaction structure that is simple, open, flexible, and branching. Deception presents the Symbiotic SNES installation as a project that revisions familiar interfaces and games through the manipulation of control messages. Unwelcoming Spaces presents No Humans Allowed as an example of a hostile environment that discourages interaction with the installation. The final section explores non-interactive approaches with Computer Music as the case study.InstallationStanceInteraction ModalityApproach to CircuitryElectrical BoxNeutralPassiveObservationalCathode Ray TubesHuman-CentricSubversive AugmentationSimplification, Semi-exposureNo Humans AllowedCircuit-CentricAggressive, HostileSemi-exposure with Observation from AfarComputer MusicNeutral (with human-centric and circuit-centric components)NoneTotal ExposureChroma Temporal Surveillance BotJudgmentalSymbiotic SNESDigital RainNeutralNone      Dynamic/Reactive to outside data3.1 Interaction RailThe termology “Interaction Rail” was invented by the author to describe installations where participants have multiple interactions with the space which must occur in a specific order. These configurations can be risky for if someone skips a step in the interaction rail, they are unable to continue and will not experience the installation as intended. Thus, these installations need to guide the participant along the rail in some manner: either with explicate written or symbolic instructions or through some other more subtle means. The installation Electrical Box is discussed as an example of one way an installation can attempt to guide a participant through an interaction rail without the use of explicate directions. 3.1.1 Electrical Box – Installation DescriptionFigure: Electrical Box - WaveCave Gallery September 9th-19th 2016 [TODO better picture]Electrical Box presents a silent room ordained with over 1000’ of instrument cables hanging from the rigging grid. Small, white Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) flicker at the ends of the cables suspended in air. Several pairs of headphones hang on the walls in the far corners of the gallery. Viewers are expected to walk to the end of the room and put on the headphones along with the attached metal tins. At first participants only hear faint static but after walking along the hanging cables radio broadcasts can be heard emanating from the cables hanging in the gallery. music in your headphones. 3.1.2 Approach to InteractionIn Electrical Box there is a singular interaction rail5 that I am attempting to guide viewers though. People can deviate from the rail, but if they are unable to skip a step and if they do not follow the rail to the end, they miss a significant aspect of the installation.  In an attempt to avoid presenting, explicate written or semiotic instructions as to how the gallery goes is to interact with the installation, several methods were used to encourage gallery viewers to ‘stay on track’. This included the strategic placement of lighting, installation hardware, and interface design.Figure 9: Required interaction for Electrical Box.The signage for Electrical Box is presented as clues to aid the visitor in following the interaction rail. The simple sign outside of the gallery, as seen in figure 20, only discloses the name of the installation, the artist, and that the installation is ‘electro-magnetic’ and ‘interactive’. Electromagnetism is mentioned for its romanticism and hints of adventure and excitement while ‘interactive’ tells the visitor they will have to participate in the space in some capacity. This helps with steps II, II and IV. Knowing that the installation is interactive in nature people will be looking for the interactive element, aiding in noticing the headphones and putting the headphones on. As the headphones are attached to the eavesdroppers and no audio is generally head when they are donned, the knowledge that the space is interactive helps the participant to use the eavesdroppers on the cables hanging in the space.      Although the installation utilized over 1000’ feet of cable, 35% of the gallery was designated as free space. EB utilized empty space in two different ways: by creating a boarder and viewing posts. The entire outside rows and columns of the grid were left void of cables (see figure 16) and this outside boarder helped gallery viewers to enter into the space, approach the headphones, and to explore the space: aiding in steps I, III, and V.  The frame functioned as a walkway around the installation; helping to guide viewers though the interaction rail while softening the transition into the gallery by allowing intermediate commitment to the space.  In addition to the walkway surrounding the installation, EB also featured a total of nine ‘listening ports’ that each allowed a gallery viewer to stand, un-harassed by hanging cables amidst the installation to listen to a sampling of the different signals present. This primarily aided with step V by encouraging viewers to walk into the network of cables and to explore the interior. The open preferred listening areas game people a place to go, destinations within the whole: providing a more engaging experience.Figure 10: EB spacial layout.Figure 11: One of two Listening Stations3.1.2.1 Lighting"A painter should begin every canvas with a wash of black, because all things in nature are dark except where exposed by the light."  -- Leonardo da Vinci“I will love the light for it shows me the way, yet I will endure the darkness for it shows me the stars.” -- Og MandinoThe approach to lighting in EB is as Mandino foreshadows, a tool to show people the way, to guide viewers along the rail. At the terminus of each of the EM transmitters is a white LED that mirrors the ‘audio’ signal inside of the cables. Meant to be the primary visual draw, the LED’s 5mm white through-hole LED’s were coated in plastic dip along with the ‘phantom-load’ resistor. Seven LEDs were concentrated in the rear of the installation space: each grid segment in the back row had its own LED. The remaining nine LED’s were distributed in an even manner in the front 7 rows, leaving a single row buffer between the formation in the rear and the random scattering in the foreground. This, along with the seven LEDs in the rear, created a focal point that encouraged folks to enter into the space and gave importance to the rear of the room.       There were two forms of light originating from the WaveCave doors that proved impactful to the installation: frame leakage and open door. Frame leaking, from in-between, under and above the entrance doors, was unfortunately unavoidable due to the construction of the doors themselves. Each of the two French doors are single pieces of ¼” glass; with at least a ¼” gap on all four sides to ensure that they do not come into contact with any other surface: I could stick a pinky finger between the two doors. (see figure xxxx) I covered the doors with black construction paper to prevent the outside light from shining through, but was unable to prevent the leakage that framed the doors themselves. With no real way to completely eliminate the boarder leakage, I looked for ways I could leverage it; I decided to add ‘peep’ holes on the doors. The second source of door light was far more impactful to the user experience. When the doors are opened the gallery is flooded with outside luminescence. The large glass doors also take a very long time to close. (TODO: measure how long. All of this was very beneficial to the individual that enters into the gallery space but ended up being quite disruptive to gallery viewers already interacting with the space. 3.2 Open InteractionThis approach presents any different ways to effect the installation and refrains from establishing a hierarchy of value over the varied interaction modalities.3.2.1 Cathode Ray Tubes - Installation DescriptionFigure 12: Cathode Ray Tubes - 3 unit version.Cathode Ray Tubes is used as an example of presenting a broad electrical system with many different optional interaction modalities.  As an Open Interaction installation, Cathode Ray Tubes does not favor one specific way to interact with its technology but merely wants participants to participate.  Cathode Ray Tubes creates a video feedback loop out of four CRT TV’s and four NES knock-off consoles (Retrons). Cathode Ray Tubes was initially exhibited in the WaveCave Gallery at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia California from April 5th, 2016 through April 11th, 2016. Subsequently, the installation has been shown at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo and is currently installed in the Kadenze Inc. corporate headquarters in Valencia, California.3.2.2 Interaction DesignThe video produced by the Retrono devices can be affected by gallery goers in many different ways:• By standing within 3 feet of any of the interfaces the gallery viewers own electromagnetic field effects the output of the synths.• By waving a hand over the device, this effects are more profound.• By touching the devices users have more agency over the resulting synthesis• By moving a box, repositioning it in relation to its TV will change the result.• By touching multiple boxes at one time the results change. • People touching people touching boxes will result in different effects.There is nothing in the gallery that values one form of interaction over another and the experience of interaction is designed to be one of discovery. The desired interaction is both none and all of the bullet points presented above. It is most important that the viewer discovers their own unique relationship with the space and the artifacts and is able to forge their own backstory and explanation of the space.3.3 DeceptionThis section examines two installations that each attempt to deceive its participants in a different way. Symbiotic SNES presents a familiar interface that behaves in unexpected ways while 6*9=42 hides its true motives from the participant. Deceptive interaction is not common in the gallery and was an interesting avenue for exploration.3.3.1 Symbiotic SNES3.3.2 6 * 9 = 423.4 Unwelcoming SpacesIf the definition of an interactive installation is only realizable with the agency of a visitor: I propose that an anti-interactive installation is an installation that when observed by a visitor loses its facilities and ceases to function. NHA’s mechatronic personalities do everything in their power to get people to leave and attempt to create an uncomfortable, unnerving hostile environment. No Humans Allowed (NHA) is an example of a circuit-centric interaction architecture. NHA’s mechatronic personalities react with aggression or silence with the presence of a human. In the since that the installation is in its most active state when no-one is present to observe the system I am presenting NHA as an anti-interactive installation.3.4.1 No Humans Allowed: Installation DescriptionNo Humans Allowed creates a community of mechatronic personalities that reside in the “gated” WaveCave community. The personalities are xenophobic: reacting to outsiders via paralysis or violence. When the presence of a human is detected, the community breaks down and no longer functions harmoniously. The result is a hostile space that outsiders are not able to enter without being either attacked or shunned by the society residing within. Each of the six mechatronic sound sculptures (personalities) are constructed from extruded aluminum, acrylic, ultrasonic rangefinders, solenoids, DC motors and LED’s. The personalities are either hanging from the grid or resting on the floor depending on their size and construction. The ultrasonic rangefinders allow each personality to detect the presence of gallery viewers who will affect their behavior. When no outside presence is detected, all members of the community are alive, active, and productive. The presence of a human or ‘other’ disrupts the community. If the outsider gets too close to any specific sculpture, the personality will either become paralyzed by hate and fear (turn off) or will attempt to “violently” deter the intruder (loud, abrupt, a-rhythmic noises). Either way, the personality will be so preoccupied by the presence of the ‘other’ it will no longer contribute to the community as a whole, disrupting the harmony of society. No Humans Allowed hopes to shine light on the danger of xenophobic ‘other’ thinking that is becoming more and more common in the UK with Brexit and the United States with the election of Trump. With the rise of mechatronics, robots, AI the question of AI morality is becoming a topic of discussion in more and more circles. Do we want our robotic children to exhibit violent, isolationist, bigoted tendencies or do we want them to be accepting, loving and caring to all other forms of live and intelligence?      Three of the robotic personalities are standing sculpture constructed out of 80/20 extruded aluminum beams, three different banks of 6 solenoids and four stepper motors. The other three personalities are motor mobiles: the top is two pieces of clear acrylic cut in a circle., there is an Arduino onboard that controls 6 5V 3200rpm DC motors that each have a white LED soldered between its two leads. The gallery consists of three pair of personalities with each pair containing one mobile and one standing sculpture. When no ‘other’ is detected in the proximity of the sculptures the standing and hanging personalities chirp in unison, each solenoid triggering is mirrored by a motor twitching in the hanging personality.  However, as soon as someone is detected the link between the two is broken as the more aggressive standing sculpture attempts to deter the invader while the hanging personality Is too paralyzed by fear and hatred to do anything.3.4.2 No Humans Allowed – Interaction DesignNo Humans Allowed discourages interaction with the robots. Ultrasonic rangefinders are used to determine the presence of outsiders and if someone is present in the room the personalities will start to shut down, no longer performing for the gallery goer. If someone ventures too close to one of the personalities they become aggressive and do anything in their power to scare the viewer away. This is the opposite of the other installations which invite interaction and encourage people to interact with the environment to forge a relationship with the space.3.5 Non-InteractiveThis section looks at two different approaches to creating installation art that is non-interactive. Digital Rain is a dynamic installation whose activity is determined by the current weather patterns from across the United States of America. The second example, Computer Music, is a static installation where an ensemble of mechatronic instruments perform a composition for eight-hours throughout the day. 3.5.1 Digital Rain – DynamicFigure 13: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo.Digital Rain is a data driven art installation, examining the crossroads of algorithmic and generative music, emergence patterns, data sonification, and technology driven systems of expression. 192 electromagnetic relay switches are arranged in a grid and mounted onto a wall. The relays are orchestrated by 6 Arduino Megas which are networked together and controlled by a hidden host computer. Weather conditions from a randomly selected meteorological station on the globe is collected by a Python script. A text-to-speech program announces the location and selected aspects of the weather report through a speaker that sits in front of the installation. Meta conditions (sunny, rain, etc.) select the base composition algorithm while the performance specifics are a factor of the forecasts wind speed, humidity, temperature and pressure. Digital Rain utilizes the mechanical ticking of the relays switching as the sonic source material for the piece. The relays, because of their precision and speed, are able to actuate fast enough to produce sustained pitch. This in addition to their idiosyncratic rhythmic snaps allows for us to create a wide variety of soundscapes. When the generative composition comes to a close, the system resets and a new station is polled.3.5.1.1 Approach to ActuationThis installation attempted to directly sonify weather conditions through the use of electromagnetic relay switches. The playback speed of the sonification was mapped to the temperature of the current station: with a slower playback when the weather is cooler. The humidity dictated the density of notes, with a higher humidity resulting in more per minute. The installation cycles through stations at a steady pace, only lingering on a single station for more than a minute if networking errors occur. This is to bring to light the dynamic, reactive nature of the installation. Additionally, with the text-to-speech announcing the weather conditions when a new station is selected the installation does a good job of explaining itself.[NV6]3.5.2 Computer Music – DeterministicFigure 14: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo.Computer Music is an installation that is not affected by any outside influence. The mechatronic ensemble of floppy disk drives(FDD), hard disk drives (HDD), stepper motors, and CD-ROM drives are controlled by four Arduino microcontrollers. A Python script runs on a Macbook Pro which listens to MIDI traveling through an internal IAC bus. For Computer Music, the composition was written in Ableton Live but the configuration allows any program or programming language capable of outputting MIDI messages to control the mechatronic ensemble. The FDD’s and CDROMs were pitched and able to be addressed with corresponding MIDI note numbers. The HDD spindles were continuously spinning throughout the composition while the stepper motors raised and lowered their top case both visually exposing the spinning disk below and sonically providing a filtered white noise. Lastly, the treys of the CD-ROMs were able to be opened both for their theatrical effect and awkward sound. 3.5.2.1 Approach to Non-InteractionWithout an interactive element or any indeterminacy due to external factors this approach gives absolute control over the outcome of the installation. As the piece involved the playback of a composition that was written especially for the mechatronics and, as with most classical music, there is no room for interpretation. The only variance in what someone experiences is dependent on the time in which they come to visit the installation. This installation takes a deterministic approach to non-interactive installation art in the same way that a looping video projected on a wall does. The video remains static, its contents do not change and if someone stays in the gallery long enough they will see the entire thing. In the same manner the composition Computer Music does not change and the mechatronic performance of that composition does not change from one instance to another: if someone stays in the gallery for long enough they will hear the entire piece.3.6 ConclusionThis chapter presented five different approaches to interactivity, with example installations, for gallery installation art. Electrical Box in the Interaction Rails section created a complex set of interactions that must be executed sequentially. Open Interaction showed Cathode Ray Tubes as an installation that presented a highly reactive system that could be interfaced with in a variety of ways: all with equal validity. Deception talked about installations that attempted to deceive users by either reappropriating familiar interfaces, Symbiotic SNES, or by disguising their true intentions, 6 * 9 = 42. Unwelcoming Spaces looked at No Humans Allowed as an installation that creates an aware space which is hostile to gallery viewers and discourage interaction. Non-Interactive looked at using both deterministic and dynamic approach’s to creating interesting non-interactive mechatronic installations with Computer Music and Digial Rain respectivly.  Chapter 4 Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCIIt is important for designers and builders of computer applications to understand the history of transparency so that they can understand that they have a choice.[22, p. 31]Reference windows and mirrors specifically how they talk about interactive art, or digital art is inherently interface design.[22] Electricity, in its raw form, is of little use: the power of electronics comes from the design and construction of many different types of electronic components that are combined in specific ways to accomplish tasks. As a result, we usually interact with electricity via a physical abstraction. For instance, when you press buttons on your microwave to make popcorn, you press a button that bridges two points in a circuit creating a connection between two parts of the circuit that did not exist before. This causes electrons to flow. You operate through the button which then operates on the circuit, changes the circuits state and electrical work is done.       This chapter discusses different approaches for creating interfaces that challenge interaction conventions between humans and electronic systems. Some of the approaches discussed, such as the Discovery Synth, by removing any abstractions for us to operate on require that the interactee becomes part of the circuitry. Approaches that bypass the interfaces of preexisting electrical systems and insert a puppeteer that controls multiple ‘puppet’ devices are presented with the Voltage Slammer and Toys projects. Techniques that involves the interception and manipulation of control data is discussed with the Synergetic SNES and 4-to-1 projects. The Retrono interfaces are discussed as examples utilizing subtractive manipulation techniques to expose systems to the direct interactions seen with the Discovery Synth project.       This chapter outlines a variety of design processes to facilitate the creation of novel interfaces for interacting with the electromagnetic spectrum.Project NameType of ProjectConvention AddressedApproach To Interface DesignHCIMHCIM NatureDiscovery SynthSynthesizer/InstallationButton/Pot AbstractionsSimplificationDirectInjectiveVoltage SlammerSequencer/Installation/Circuit Bending ToolObject interactionAbstractionAbstractedInjectiveModular SNESCircuit Bent Video Game Console / InstallationExpectationsSubversive Injection and redirectionAbstractedSubversive and InjectiveSynergetic SNESInstallationCo-operative gamingComplicationInterjectedSubversiveRetronoVideo Synthesizer/InstallationObject interactionBypassing interface, simplificationDirectInjectiveEavesdropperSuper-Human Powers/InstallationAgency SimplificationDirectInvestigoryTable 1: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities4.1 Abstractive/DeconstructionFigure 15: Discovery SynthThis section introduces the Discovery Synth (DS) as an example of applying techniques of deconstructivism and abstraction to interface design. This project takes the abstraction of a button and potentiometer and realizes them in a way that integrates the human body as the mechanical portion of the device. 4.1.1 Discovery Synth: Project OverviewThe DS is a Raspberry Pi powered interface that has been used for both installations and experimental music performance. It features sixteen voltage dividers, eight of which are standard variety potiometers while the other eight were custom for the DS. Additionally, there are eight buttons which were also designed custom for the DS. The instrument was crafted from reclaimed materials: the buttons and pots were housed in an old lamp casing, the main body was crafted out of wood found on the side of the road, and the ‘tuning’ pegs were salvaged from an old guitar. Inside of the wooden housing there is a Raspberry Pi with a custom deigned cape that allowed the device to read its 24 sliders, pots, and buttons. 4.1.2 ButtonsThis projects buttons removed the physical mechanism which separates the action of pressing from the flow of electrical current. They have no casing, or housing and there is no part of the design that is not functional and vitally important to working properly. The design process involved distilling how Normally Open (NO) electro-mechanical push buttons function: they consist of two conductive paths that are electronically separated from each other in their resting state. When a specific event occurs6 in some way the paths are joined temporarily allowing a current to flow from one path to another.       The interface presents two conductive bolts spaced a few millimeters apart: one end is connected to the power rail while the other end is being monitored by the Raspberry Pi.  By pressing on the two bolts with a finger an interactee is able to create an electrical connection through their skin and the moisture on their body to complete the circuit. Skin is one of the most resistive types of tissue in the human body with resistance of over 100,000 ohms in some cases, as oppose to our internal body resistance averaging around 300 ohms. As result, the DS’s button circuitry utilized 10Mohm resistors for pull downs to account for the overall circuit resistance. 4.1.3 SlidersThe goal for the construction of the ‘sliders’ was to remove the physical abstraction that rests between the human and the circuitry and to create a more direct interaction. The design removed the wiper from the potentiometer design and instead relied on the user physically connecting the leads to a resistive strip. It used 32 gauge Kanthal7 wire. As I wanted to use a material that was as resistive as possible I chose to use the smallest gague before running the risk of injuring the user. The 32 AWG gauge wire that was used measured in as a mere 8 thousandths of an inch thick and worked well for the device. The wire is strung across two bridges that position the wire about a half an inch above a strip of copper tape. The tape has an extremely low resistance, less than 1 Ohm a foot, and functioned as a trace or wire. One end of the Kanthal wire is attached to system ground while the other end is connected to the power rail on the Raspberry Pi. The copper tape is hooked up to a xxxx multiplexer aft When the tungsten wire is pressed against the copper tape a voltage divider is created. Unfortunately, as the wires have such low resistance, the voltage dividers draw a fairly large amount of current; 110mA each. Unlike a Microcontroller such as the Arduino, the Raspberry Pi 2 has very low maximum output current ratings on its GPIO pins. The Pi 2 was designed with the spec of 3mA current draw from each of the pins, with a maximum draw of 16mA from a single pin; or 51mA from the entire device.[23] The combined current draw of all eight of my deconstructed sliders was more than the Pi could handle at 880mA. The solution was to add a resistor in series with the tungsten wire with a value of 1k. Unfortunately, this greatly reduced the fidelity of the signal received from the sensor, but with some software smoothing it was usable given the fact that the controller also included eight vanilla pots that could be mapped to anything requiring more precision.	One disadvantage of this design is the fact that when the sliders are not being pressed with a finger the Kental wire will move back up to its resting position breaking the circuit.  In this way, the sliders act as Normally Open Potiometers NOP’s. This querk ended up being desirable under some circumstances: working well for controlling some effects, filters, or sampleplayback speeds. In compsitions that demanded the ability to hold and maintain a intermitant value those controls were either mapped to the standard potiometers, of which eight were provided by the DS, or copper pipe segments were used to hold a value, freeing up the fingers for other tasks.      This circuitry allowed for the performer to directly complete the circuitry for the voltage divider without acting through a physical abstraction. There is no barrier between the human finger and the electrons flowing through the synthesizer. This gives this instrument a quality that is somewhat unique within the domain of computer interfaces; it will electronically react differently to the person depending on their unique electrical properties at the time.4.2 [NV7] Camouflage and ExposureFigure 16: Second version of the Retrono SynthesizersThis section looks at the Retrono interface, used in the Cathode Ray Tubes installation, as a case study in applying techniques of camouflage and exposure to interface design. The Retrono interface is simple a repackaged video game console that is presented in a way that violates the original devices circuitry. The interface exposes, highlights, and reveals all of the internal circuitry of the original device, ironically disguising it from recognition.4.2.1 Retrono – Design ApproachDesigning the Retrono was an act of removal and replacement. After completely removing the original plastic cases, the controller ports were de-soldered and the red power LED’s were replaced with white ones. Retrons are literally turned inside out8 and repackaged in custom enclosures. With their circuitry unveiled, and with no software to guide their computational logic, the Retrons becomes very susceptible to electro-magnetic interference. The Retrons are effectively transformed into 8-bit a/v synthesizers that generate their output based on the electrical noise present in the circuit. Cathode Ray Tubes eliminates all sensors, buttons, knobs and all “middle-men” between the circuit and the user and is directly controlled by the electrical properties of the user’s body. The Retronos are designed to make the human body an effective controller: due to its inherent electrical properties. Acts such as waving a hand in front of a TV or Retron, touching a TV or a Retron, moving a Retron’s angle or distance from a TV and combinations of the above (touching a Retron and placing your hand a few inches away from a TV) will produce different effects that resonate throughout the feedback loop. If multiple people are in the gallery space, the installation scales nicely as the number and complexity of the effects produce even more drastic results in the Retron feedback loop.4.3 Re-Appropriation of ConventionsThe Modular SNES is introduced in this section as an example of an interface that challenges interaction through the re-appropriation of established interaction conventions. This project takes a patchbay interface, similar to a modular synthesizer, and overlays that onto of a SNES video game console to control a variety of different glitches and circuit bends. 4.3.1 Modular SNES: Project DescriptionThe Modular SNES is a Super Nintendo Entertaiment System that has been hacked and circuit bent using an Arduino Microcontroller. As the internal logic levels of the SNES if 5V  4.4 DeceptionThis section presents the Symbiotic SNES (SSNES) as well as the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) as examples of deceptive HCIM.  First the SSNES’s project is discussed and its method of presenting familiar situations and breaking your expectations. Next the “6 x 9 = 42” installation and the CTSB are presented as a more sinister example where the system makes grand claims on the viewer’s political orientation and publically slanders them for their perceived views.4.4.1 Symbiotic SNES: Project DescriptionThe SSNES intercepts controller messages from two seemingly unaffected controllers and alters the data before sending it to the unaware SNES console. What makes this interface deceptive is the fact that there is no indication to either the SNES or the Player that an agent is acting on the data. The SSNES acts aa saboteur or psy-opp, coloring the data into misinformation. The SSNES system is an attempt to create new experiences from familiar technology. Two SNES controllers are attached to an Arduino Mega that mimics a SNES console and decodes the controller information, such as button presses, performs computation on the data, and sends the data in a modified state to an actual SNES. What the system does depends on the current operating mode. NameOperationResultUltimate Co-OpBitwise ANDOnly buttons pressed by both players are passed to the console.Bitwise XOROnly buttons pressed by one player will get passed to the console. (multiplayer mode)Alternating-PressesButton PressesAlternating-TimeTurn LengthsPlayers alternate total control over the character over a set period of time.Two FaceController SplitPlayers alternate control over different parts of the controller.       There have been over a dozen modes created to this date spread between two main types: single player and multiplayer modes. The single player modes are all different ways that two participants are able to play a single player game together assisted the SSNES. For example, the “Agree” mode only sends messages (button presses) to the SNES if both of the input controllers are pressing the same button at the same time.  The “Both Control” mode grants both input controller’s full agency over the SNES by summing the input from the two controllers into one stream of information sent to the SNES. “Teamwork” functions by only accepting one button press from each player at a time: if you want to run and jump one input controller must be pressing the run button while the other must press the jump button. There are also a few alternating modes that only give one player control at a time, but shifts the control back and forth between the two input controller according to the number of buttons pressed or a time period.      The second category of modes are the multiplayer modes which were designed to be used when playing a multiplayer competitive game. 4.4.2 “6 x 9 = 42” and the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot – Interface DescriptionThe Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) is a simple interface that only consists of a single button and a 12 position rotary switch. The two components are housed in a xxx metal box, typically used for guitar effects pedals. The box is connected to an iMac which runs a Processing program. The program performs various types of slit-scan inspired video effects processing on the frames picked up from the computers webcam. The rotary switch changes the type of processing that is being performed. Examples include color-separated Perlin noise masks, xxxx, xxx, and xxx. When the button is pressed the program will reconstruct the mask, resulting in a variation of the type of processing being performed. 4.4.3 CTSB – Interaction DesignCTSB was designed with the principles of creating a friendly, easy to use device that appears like it is doing one thing while in reality its real agenda is hidden. While the interface is straightforward and designed to be simple to understand and operate, the software serves a more sinister purpose. 10% of the time when the button is pressed the program will save the current frame, perform a Chroma analysis and based on the results assign a political orientation to the interactee. The program then proceeds to tweet the image along with a proclamation of political orientation. 	None of this activity is explicitly told to the user, who only experiences a temporally dropped framerate. In fact, the user will have to use their computer or smart device to go to https://www.twitter.com/CTSB3 to get any idea of the agenda of the program. 	The CTSB has gone through two revisions. The first version of the interface consisted of six buttons on the top of a BB aluminum project enclosure box. The buttons were broken out into two rows of three buttons. All of the buttons were xxxmm Normally Open pushbuttons. The top right button was red while all of the other buttons were black. Inside of the enclosure an Arduino Nano reads the button presses and reported the result to a Processing sketch that handled both communication with the microcontroller and the video processing effects. Each of the buttons on the controller game the user an axis of control over the video processing. This included: changing the buffer length, reconstructing a mask, cycleing through the mask types, toggeling between separating the Red, Green, and Blue color channels, inverting the color processing, tweeting a photo, and cycleing through different frame rates. All of these degrees of control, resulted in millions of different program states that could be achieved. After some testing it became apparent that something simpler that facilitated a more curated set of possible states was required. 	The second version of the interface contained only a single button that both redraws the masks under the current program rules, and a 12 position continuous rotary switch which allowed the user to choose between 12 different program states. This simplified design allowed for gallery viewers to more consistently experience a program state that is ‘interesting’, get less confused by what each button actually did, while still inviting exploration, and allowing for millions of possibilities. Another benefit with this configuration is how it obscures the act of tweeting from the user. By simple tweeting the photo 10% of the time whenever the button is pressed no explaination needs to be given. [NV8][TODO: add pictures of the two different interfaces, also add picture of an example output from the interface.4.5 Removing AgencyThis section presents the EavesDropper as an example of an interface designed to remove the users agency over the device. The goal of the EavesDropper was to impart a superhuman ability, the ability to listen to magnetic flux, on users of the device. As the device was not intended to be used as an interface, or a technological tool, I did not want to give users the impression that they were in control of the device, or even fully understand it. The Marvel superhero Cyclops, is an apt analogy. His destructive laser vision is always on as long as his eyes are open. It is always blazing away at 100%, there is no option for calibrating the destructive power of his vision without the use of technology. Likewise I wanted peoples sense of magnetic eavesdropping to be something that they either have, in fully power, or do not have.4.5.1 Eavesdropper – Interface DescriptionFigure 17: Eavesdropper from outside4.5.2 Eavesdropper - Interaction DesignThe Eavesdropper were designed to be magical black boxes9: artifacts that obscured  its internal workings and logic from the participant. In addition to avoiding the possibility that a gallery viewer would misread the interaction element of the installation as the fiddling with dials and knobs on the EavesDroppers the absence of any user control removes any calibration process, operational learning curve, or control mishaps that might occur. (TODO: figure out something to cite about not giving too much control to people to in the gallery).      The absence of user control over the EavesDroppers also helps guide participants to pick up the devices and walk around the gallery (step five in the rail). The lack of an interface had the added benefit of removing any frustration related to learning/adjusting a set of parameters, while also greatly reducing the number of things that can be broken or damaged. Ideally, the EavesDropper functions as an extension of the body; a task easier to achieve with a simple, intuitive interface.      As soon as someone is given a degree of control over an object, a relational shift occurs. Once the person is granted agency over the object, a dominant relationship emerges. The object become subservient to the user: the object is controlled by its user. This destroys the sensation of wonder; we now control the device, have power over it and it is no longer as magical, operating beyond our control and understanding. To avoid giving the interactee any mechanism for controlling the EavesDropper circuitry, the devices have a fixed.4.6 Orchestrating CircuitryFigure 18: The Voltage SlammerThis approach to interface design seeks to create a singular interface that can control several different electrical systems that would otherwise have to be controlled separately. The Voltage Slammer is used as a case study of how this approach can be applied while creating an interface for controlling circuit bent children’s toys. 4.6.1 The Voltage Slammer - Interface DescriptionThe Voltage Slammer interface is designed to control a variety of circuit bent battery powered toys with a central interface. The interface has gone through several different designs, the first version of the interface was made of wood, included less channels of control than the most rescent design and did not include nearly as much visual feedback as the current design. The current iteration of the Voltage Slammer features sixteen rotary encoders with built in push buttons and RGB10 LEDs. I replaced the SPST11 toggle switches with large sleeker metal pushbuttons, also with LED’s inside. The current interface is powered by an Arduino Mega and can be either batter powered or powered via USB. It functions both as a controller for specially hacked toys or electronic devices or as a useful tool for hardware hacking and circuit probing/bending. It is designed specifically for working with low voltage DC circuits and can’t handle anything high voltage or high current. Its first eight output channels are PWM12 waves each with a pot controlling intensity (PW) and a switch to cut off the current flow entirely. The first eight outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation.      The next five outputs are very similar to the first eight with the noticeable exception that they have no feedback LEDs, no on/off switches and are arranged on the interface in a separate group. They are intended to be used to control motors in bent devices, or any other bend in which you desire a constant current and don’t want the output to be effected by the master delay pot. When Toys was presented at the Digital Arts Expo these outputs controlled the talking robotic bear. In the rear of the device all 13 outputs are accessible via RCA connectors, with the ring connected to a common ground and the internal pin the hot signal. In addition, there is one additional RCA connection in which both the ring and pin are connected to ground, to allow for easier probing and bending.      The Voltage Slammer is not only a mechanism for controlling circuit bent electronics but it also a platform for assisting in the act of circuit bending itself. The Voltage Slammer is part of an ongoing exploration in controlling circuit bent toys and instruments with Arduino powered interfaces.  It allows for simultaneous control over up to sixteen circuit bent devices.  The interface has a RGB-pushbutton-rotary encoder for each of its sixteen channels of control with an additional eight buttons, also each with their own RGB led. The interface has a RGB led for status and debugging. Lastly, so it had options for its interactivity it also featured two ultrasonic rangefinders: one facing upwards and the other facing forward.4.6.2 The Voltage Slammer – Interaction DesignThe front and sides of the interface has built in ultra-sonic rangefinders granting the interface a rough since of spacial awareness. This proved especially beneficial when the interface was used in an installation setting. When the installation is idol, it will remain off for just under a minute before pulsing all its channels, basically calling out for interactees, it will continue repeating this cycle until someone approaches in which it will turn itself on. Thanks to its ultrasonic rangefinder the Voltage Slammer was aware of the presence of humans. When no-one was near the device the device entered into a resting state. It stopped sending continuous signals to its circuit bent minions and was mostly silent, allowing the toys to complete the cycles they might have been currently engaged in. The Voltage Slammer will then proceed to randomly pulse one of the devices every two minutes. This is an act to silicate attention from anyone in the gallery. Once the presence of a body is detected by the voltage slammer the device will enter into its active state; again sending messages out to its toys.	The result of the Voltage Slammers interaction with its circuit bent toys was in a state of constant flux: it was hard to predict what the actual results might be from one sitting to another. The system would behave differently if there were 5 devices connected or 10 devices as each new device that was added changed the electronic properties of the system. 4.6.3 OneToFour – Interface DescriptionOneToFour allows for the message from a single SNES remote control to be sent to up to four SNES consoles at the same time. OneToFour has two input SNES controller jacks that any SNES compatable controller can be plugged into. The interface has a total of eight output ports so the interface can allow two players to play on four different consoles at the same time. The Arduino Mega that controls the device is housed in a small clear plastic box, so that its feedback LED’s, one for each button, can be viewed if desired.4.6.4 OneToFour - Interaction DesignOneToFour, the object, does not offer any form of user control. In fact, the interface is not really an interface as much as it is a means to an end. The interaction is result of the way we adapt to the situation. It is an interface because it forces us to interact with the game and the controller in a way that is different that if we had the device, it also allows us to control things that we would not be able to control otherwise.  4.7 ConclusionThis chapter presented six different approaches for the design of interfaces for human circuit interaction. Terminology was proposed to describe how each of these devices are interacted with in regards to direct human circuit interaction. Interfaces that have been built using the design approaches were presented as examples of how these design approaches can be adopted in real world interface design. Each of the interfaces were design with a specific interaction scenario in mind and were either custom designed for an installation or were created as an experiment in interaction. How users interact with the device and their electrical systems was discussed for each interface in terms of their design goals. 	Collectively, these interfaces and design approaches are explorations in our relationship with electrical systems. They strive to invite us to minimalize our distance from the electrical systems we prevalently use and to rethink our relationships, interactions, and co-existence with electrical systems.Chapter 5 Approaches to Human-Robot PerformanceThis chapter addresses four different approaches to creating Human-Robot performances. Humans Leading Intelligent Mechatronic Instrumentalists discusses performances that are human-lead but involve reactive, intelligent mechatronic performers as well. The next section, Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Humans discusses performances where the music was written for mechatronic instrumentalists to perform but for humans to listen to and enjoy. This is contrasted by the next section, Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves which covers performances that are written within the perceptual and/or aesthetic frame of the mechatronic instrumentalists themselves, with the human enjoyment secondary. This idea is compounded and distilled in the fourth section: Exclusive Robot-Centric Performances which explores performances that are disrupted by the presence of humans, that are intended only for mechatronic personalities.        Examining human-mechatronic performances in terms of agency and role affords unique opportunities to analyze performance opportunities when it comes to these events. Mechatronics systems by definitions.PerformanceHuman Role – During PerformanceComposerMechatronic RoleCategory of PerformanceRobot WhispersBeatlesinstrumentRobot Improvisational JamInstrumentalistinstrumentMechatronic Instruments Played by HumansHedonism BotInstrumentalistMechatronic Instrumentalists performing with HumanHello HumansNoneInstrumentHeadless Mechatronic5.1 Mechatronic Instruments, Instrumentalists, Personalities, and Digital Co-Composers“A robotic musical instrument is a sound-making device that automatically creates music with the use of mechanical parts, such as motors, solenoids and gears.”[24, p. 1] This section defines, compares, and contrasts mechatronic instruments, mechatronic instrumentalists, and mechatronic personalities.5.1.1 Mechatronic InstrumentsThe mechatronic instrument is the base line that other configurations are compared to. A mechatronic instrument is played, just as any other instrument might be played. It has notes written for it, and a program tells it what to play. The instruments are unaware of who is in the room, the reactions of their environment, the drifting tempo, or anything else about their environment and state of being: just like a guitar is unaware of these things. The Machine Lab at CalArts is a perfect example of an ensemble of mechatronic instruments[21]. These robots can be controlled through a central server in a variety of ways, but do not themselves exhibit any awareness of their surroundings or intelligent actions. Mechatronic instruments can be played either in real time by using some digital interface or can be controlled by code that is started the manner in which they are controlled is secondary to the fact that they are intended to be controlled directly by humans. 5.1.2 Mechatronic InstrumentalistA mechatronic instrumentalist is a mechatronic instrument that is able to exercise some degree of agency over its performance parameters without direct human input in real time. Mechatronic Instrumentalists include mechatronic instruments with feedback systems that allow them to adjust their performance on the fly as well as mechatronic instruments that utilize machine learning to react to other performers and the events on stage. What makes a mechatronic instrumentalist an instrumentalist instead of the instrument is autonomy and the ability to make descisions, just as a human instrumentalist is required to do. It it not the hardware configuration of the robot, but instead how the robot uses its hardware.5.1.3 Mechatronic PersonalityA mechatronic entity that exhibits traits of intelligence, preference, and personality. Mechatronic personalities can also be a Mechatronic Instrument but does not have to be. They make descisions based on personality traits that area not intrinsicly linked to music performance. They are in-fact not designed to be instruments, but instead make sound that can be considered music during theit operation. The robots utilized in the installation  No Humans Allowed discussed in xxxx xxxx are an example of a mechatronic personality. Another example are xxx and xxxxx designed by Eric Heep in 2015-16.5.1.4 Digital Co-ComposersWhenever human composers relinquish playback control to a computational entity they are relying on a digital co-composer. This includes the use of random numbers, API’s or other web services, and many algorhythms. Digital Co-Composers are very common, especially in compositions that are written using a text based coding languages. Just as in Jazz the composer leaves a good deal of room for the players to freely interperate the song and play within its guidelines. Digial Co-Composers allow composers of electronic music to relinquish some of the specifics of the interperitation of a composition to the players. 5.2 Mechatronic Instruments played by HumansThis section presents the Robots Improvisation Jam as an example of a human-mechatronic performance that only utilizes mechatronic instruments. 5.2.1 Robots Improvisational JamFigure 19: Composition for Robots 2014 final improvisational jam.This group improvisational music performance featured 8 student performers [TODO, who] each improvising with a variety of mechatronic instruments, digital synthesis engines, audio feedback, and traditional string instruments. The mechatronic instruments in the machine lab were all controlled by the performers using a variety of interfaces including grid controllers, laptops, and microphones. Throughout the course of the performance the rhythmic, harmonic, and melodic content is all dictated by the actions of the human performers and the instruments no not exhibit any agency over their own actions. Just like the guitar played by Dexter Shepard, the mechatronic instruments in the piece were simply played as instruments and were not performers for the piece.5.3 Mechatronic Instruments playing “Headless”This section presents three different compositions using mechatronic instruments that perform without the guidance of human performers. These compositions follow the “press play and sit down” presentation mentality of many electro-acoustic acts. Unlike compositions that utilize mechatronic instruments played by humans, when mechatronic instrumens are played without the presence of any other human performers on stage a completely different stage dynamic emerges. Akin the many electro-acoustic music performances, the technology and the composer take center stage and the expectations for a visual experience are diminished. There is less centralization of audience attention and people are more likely to close their eyes a listen to the music.5.3.1 BeatlesBeatles is an eight-minute etude written for MalleOTon and Lydia that is performed in a concert setting. The piece begins very quietly with many low velocity messages being randomly sent to Lydia the mechatronic piano. Each individual actuation is barely noticeable and only produces minute mechanical flutters, not even approaching the required force to strike the strings on the piano. The rate and overall velocity of these message slowly increase over a period of a minute after which time MalleOTon begins to exhibit the same behavior which starts the cycle at the beginning. The two instruments trade off several times, progressively getting louder and faster. As the actuations approach the point of striking the strings or keys both of the instruments become active together. At no point is a single message strong enough to activate either instruments sound making device, however, after approximately six minutes into the composition some solenoids are able to strike their key or string when two messages are received in short succession.        triggers each of the actuators on the instruments alternatively at first until the second half of the composition where they are both actuated at once. Each of the note-on messages, however, are being sent at velocities that are below what is required to strike either the bars or strings. Throughout the course of the composition the velocities slowly increase and the interval between messages decreases. Even at its apex, no single message from the server contains a velocity that is strong enough to sound the instrument on its own. However, because the messages are sent to random notes,	Beatles is coded in the ChucK programming language. As the composition relies heavily of random number generators and the narrow gap where an actuator makes noise but does not strike its sound making mechanism each time the composition is actualized the performance will vary. Although the sonic result will vary with each performance, the result of this variance is the result of the digital co-composer and not the mechatronic instrument itself. Therefore, this composition still only utilizes Mechatronic Instruments.  5.3.2 Hello HumansHello Humans is a 5-minute-long composition written for xxx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx and xxx. Hello Humans explores precise rhythmic modulations throughout the course of the installation and specialization throughout the Machine Lab and is performed in a concert setting. The composition is through-composed in Ableton Live and will result in the same note messages each time it is run. The composition is static and does not utilize any digital co-composer. Throughout the course of the composition the temp is constantly changing, never remaining static at any point. The constant tempo changes and subtle builds and slows would have been impossible for humans performers to execute. The piece is partly an exploration in how perceptible these constant changes in tempo would be to the listener. Hello Humans begins with the chime of a a single bell on MahaDevi Bot. As the reverberations from the bell fades, BreakBot’s snare brush slowly starts to rub on the head of the snare. Bells, chimes, and cymbals quietly accompany the brush as the tempo slowly climbs. As the tempo increases other percussion instruments quietly join in. [TODO] Listen to the piece and finish describing what is going on.	Hello Humans could not have been performed by human performers due to complexities in its rhythmic and tempo changes. It presents the robots foremost and they are the sole performers not having to share the stage with humans. It makes use of specialization and the fact that the instrumentsnFg                                                                             are spread throughout the space, with several robots hanging above the audience members heads. 5.4 Humans Leading Intelligent MechatronicsRobots Whispers and Hedonism Bot are two examples of musical performances that present reactive mechatronic systems which listen for input from human performers to determine their respective course of action. In both of the piece both humans and robots share the the approach to human-robot interaction differ. In Robot Whispers, the mechatronics are subservient to the humans while in Hedonism Bot the human performers are subservient to the robot. Robot Whispers13 had an ensemble of seven mechatronic instrumentalists react to the whisperings of a single human performer. Hedonism Bot14, alternatively, used a single mechatronic personality that reacted to the physical proximity of three human performers.5.4.1 Robot Whispers - Performance DescriptionRobot Whispers was composed in collaboration with Eric Heep15 and Danny Clarke16. Throughout the course of the performance a text score is algorithmically generated by a program in real time. The score contains information about the word that should be spoken and the tone in which it should be uttered. Eric and Danny followed the text score and quietly spoke the words into personal microphones that were processed with reverb and delay before being amplified and sent through quad sound into the performance space. The microphones have a STFT performed on the input spectrum in real time. The system split the spectrum up into three bands each representing the high, mid, and low frequencies. My job throughout the course of the performance is to use a Mini-Korg controller to control a threshold for each of the three frequency bins. If the overall amplitude of the band is higher than the threshold that I set, the robots will chime in and play with us: attempting to echo our language. Three groups are made with the robots in the Machine Lab dividing up their various actuator into a high, medium and low group. Each of the three actuator groups are mapped to the FFT groups so that each FFT group corresponds to its equivalent actuator group.5.5 Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves This section discussed Computer Music and No Humans Allowed as examples of Mechatronic performances conducted for the enjoyment of robot performers. Computer Music is reintroduced within the context of musical performance. presented as an installation is actually a performance. The composition is a long scale phase piece that is more composed to be interesting for the performers than the viewers. 	Just because these pieces are conceived as for the enjoyment of the robots, does not exclude humans from observing the performance and formulating their own appreciation. What makes these works for the bot is the fact that humans are either not intended and are unable to experience the unaltered composition (in the case of NHA) or, in the case of Computer Music, the composition is written on a scale that is not aligned with a human’s temporal orientation. 5.5.1 Computer Music – As a PerformanceWhen Computer Music was shown at the Digital Arts Expo it was installed and active between 12:00PM and 8:00PM. Throughout the day the ensemble performed a single composition that could only have been performed with the precision of mechatronic instrumentalists. The intention of the piece was not for gallery goers to stay for the entire composition. It was not presented as a concert performance, but instead as an installation, regardless for the mechatronic instruments the installation was absolutely a performance of a single composition. It being presented as a installation had nothing to do with the  mechatronics not performing a song or musical perfomrnace: on the contrary. Instead, it had to be presented as an installation  due to the limitations of human attention span and temporal observance. ????XXX???5.6 Mechatronic Personality PerformancesThis section discusses No Humans Allowed as an installation that creates a community of mechatronic personalities, each with their own rules of (hostile) interaction. Although the resulting sounds of the installation is rhythmic and could be classified as musical under som definitions any music qualities are simply a byproduct of the social interaction taking place in the gallery. 5.6.1 Mechatronic PersonalitiesThe author has created three mechatronic personalities for the purpose of exploring human-mechatronic interaction. There are two models of personalities: model A and model B. Both of the models are approximetally five feet tall, are constructed primarally from extruded aluminum, are powered by the Pantheon Mechatronic Art System, have an ultrasonic rangefinder poised at all four of its sides, features dozens of solenoids and LED strips. Model A [TODO add pictures] has six rotary solenoids, six large push-pull sonenoids, and six smaller push-pull solenoids. None of the solenoids serve any explicate musical or mechanic purpose: the rotary solenoids are hanging in air while the small and large push-pull solenoids are all simple banging aginst the aluminum. Model B does not have the rotary solenoids and instead features sixteen additional push-pull solenoids banging on all sides of the bot. Although there are two Model B personalities, the two differ from each other in minor details of their assembily and construction.	Each of the personalities have their own USB hub to power the 5-7 arduinos required to control all of the sensors, solenoids, and LED’s. Additionally, each of the bots has its own 24V and 12V switching power supply to power the actuators. The personalities each have casters and are able to be pushed around. The Pantheon ChucK server is used to control the personalities.5.6.2 AntiSocialAntiSocial was the first performance that featured a mechatronic personality. In AntiSocial a Model A personality was given the behavior of Craig and forced to interact with gallery viewers for several hours during the Fall 2016 MTIID Masters Show. Craig suffers from severe social aanxiety and is poor as communicating and socializing with both robots and humans. When no-one was directly interacting with Craig he attempted to osych himself up, tring to build his confidence for the eneviatable social encounter. As Craig sees someone approaching him, all his confidence fades and he is unable to speak, retreating into himself. If someone gets close enough that Craig is unable to ignore them he does his best to interact. Unfortunetally, things go from bad to wrose for Craig as he fumbles for the correct words, loudness, and pase. 	These interaction scenerios manifested themselves sonically as follows. When Craig was unable to detect someone that was within 8 feet of where he was standing he would rhythmically trigger his solenoids in sequence. To represent him building his confidence the time between strikes slowly decreased as the velocity of the strikes slowly increased. When Craig detected someone was getting closer to him, he would effectively slut down and go silent: only rarely activating one of his solenoids or LED’s. Lastly, as Craig detected someone within two feet of where he was standing he would attempt to converse. As he is very bad at articulating his feelings the results is an arrhythmic splattering of loud, abrupt, and inappropiate solenoid strikes accompanied by excessively bright strobing light. 	AntiSocial was the authors first exploration into embuing human personalitiy traits, in this case shyness and social anxiety, onto a mechatronic entity. This piece is not a musical performance, nor is it an interactive art installation. Instead it is a performance of social interaction akin to dramatology.5.6.3 Hedonism Bot – Performance DescriptionFigure 20: xxxx xxxx feeding the Hedonism Bot during a performance of Hedonism Bot.Hedonism Bot is a musical ritual that is performed in a concert setting. One of the Model A mechatronic personalities is given the characteristics of “Hedonism Bot”. Hedonism Bot, throughout the course of the seven-minute improvisation, is fed the sounds of humans performers who bow to the robots and present their offerings one at a time. As Hedonism Bot feeds it activates its solenoids for longer and louder with each meal. Eventually Hedonsim Bot has been fed enough to come to life and the social dynamics of the performance shift. Instead of the human performers leading the pace and narrative of the ritual, Hedonism bot takes the lead and cycles through its actuators. As the humans fade their iPads out, Hedonism bot takes the audience through the outro before the composition comes to a close.      This is the performance where we feed the bot. Talk about the dangers of the performance space and how it forced us to “wizard of Oz” the live performance. The following citation covers the Wizard of Oz effect.[22, pp. 43–44]5.6.4 No Humans AllowedNo Humans Allowed is the final piece discussed in this thesis that utilizes the authors mechatronic personalities. While AntiSocial and Hedonism Bot both only used a single Model A personality NHA uses one Model A personality in addition to two Model B personalities to create a community of zenophobic robots that reside in the gallery. 	Simular to the interaction seen in AntiSocial each of the personalities have a total of three states, or moods. When no outsides are detected in the gallery the personalities are in their productive, happy state. They rhythmically activate their solenoids simulating a fully functioning productive state of mind. If a personality detects an outside presence in the gallery, their productivity steeply declines as the personality is so preoccupied with the outsider. This state is the serveilance state or cautious mood. If one of the personalities notices an outsider  they also alert the other bots, who also enter into a state of serveilance, but with a higher productivity rating that the bot who sounded the alarm. The last state is activated if an outside ventures too close to a robot. The personality turns hostile as it flashes its light (which are dorment in other states) and slams its solenoids in a disturbingly loud and arrhythmic way. The hostile personality alerts the other personalities in the gallery who each enter into a full state of serveilance.      To communicate with each other the three personalities are networked together through a Pantheon server running on an iMac.5.7 ConclusionIn this chapter, the terms Mechatronic Instrument, Mechatronic Instrumentalist, Mechatronic Personality, and digital co-composer were defined. Additionally, five different approaches to human-mechatronic performance were discussed in terms of mechatronic agency and reactiveness. Additionally, several installations and performances were presented as examples of the roles these entities can play in mechatronic installation and performance. Chapter 6 Conclusion6.1 SummaryThis document discusses a portion of the work created by Nathan Villicaña-Shaw during his tenure as a MFA student at CalArts. The projects presented in this thesis are all different ways the author has approached questioning, exploring, and examing human-circuit interaction. Through the compleation of these projects the author has refined his approach to interaction design. Additionally, many examples of unconventional interfaces were examed as well as human-robot performances. This body of work serves as a launching pad for the authors artistic persuits into interaction design.       In the 21st century it is nearly impossible to avoid digital technology in our daily lives. We are surrounded by such technological wonders that are capable of such wondrous things that we are forced to often interact with electronics within the context of layers upon layers of abstractions. The work discussed in this thesis seeks to re-open the discussion of how we interact with electrical systems on the most fundamental way. How our bodies electrical properties coexist and affect the electromagnetic devices that we co-exist with in our modern era. By bringing light to our mutual effects on each other my work hopes to bring about a sense of electromagnetic empathy.[NV9]	The goal of the art presented in this thesis is to invite us to question how we interact not only with electrical systems and digital devices, but with everyone and everything in the world around us. I hope to present these interactive scenerios in a manner where people are empowered to discover the experience themselves.6.2 Primary ContributionsThis thesis presented a wide variety of interfaces, installations, and performances which approach human circuit interaction as a focal source of inspiration. Each example was analyzed in terms of its human-circuit interaction modality and how it explored our relationship with technology interfaces. Most research related to interaction xxxxx or xxxx. The work presented in this document instead attempts to remove abstractions and invites us to both physically interact with the circuit but to also, perhaps, learn about its inner workings.?????6.3 Final Thoughts[NV10]This work in this thesis is inspired by the author’s fascination with electricity, magnetism, and how we as humans have harnessed electro-magnetism to run the world around us. Creating art in collaboration with technology is important to the author. Creating art that demands unconventional interaction modalities must reinvent the gallery space. Chapter 7 Appendix The appendix goes into technical depth about the systems used in the authors installations, interfaces, and projects mentioned in this thesis.7.1 Pantheon Mechatronic SystemPantheon is a mechatronic art system that is an adaptation of the MTIID servers and hardware that controls the mechatronic instruments residing in the Machine Lab at CalArts. The system is structured to be modular, flexible, and easy to learn and provides the technological core of my mechatronic installations. This section provides an overview of the software and hardware systems that make up the Pantheon Mechatronic System.7.1.1 ServerThe Pantheon server is written in ChucK and utilizes a variety of shielded Arduino Uno and Mega clients. Upon initialization the server uses a handshake routine to determine the client configuration. If sensor Arduinos are found the server will start a separate process that listens to sensors found on the network. If actuator Arduinos are found the server will determine the hierarchy between all of the clients. If groups of Arduinos are found together they will be linked under a single OSC address in addition to their individual addresses.  Once the server is running, a supplementary pythons script can be run to convert MIDI messages found on an internal IAC bus into the OSC messages that The Pantheon understands. This allows for the actuators to be controlled by any programming language, or program that is able to output either MIDI or OSC messages.7.1.1.1 SensorsTo handle the reading of sensors, such as with the Theia boards when SR-04 ultrasonic rangefinders are used the following approach is used. When the server is initialized a shred is sporked that consists of an infinite loop that polls each of the Theia's for their sensor readings.A separate shred is sporked during initialization that listens for responses from Theia, if any are heard it updates the Orchestrator which manages the actions of each of the actuator shields.7.1.1.2 ConductorThe conductor orchestrates all of the actuator shields and keeps track of the moods of each of the personalities.7.1.1.3 HandshakeEach of the Pantheon bots utilize the same handshake routine. TODO: add snippets of codeThe server sends a handshake message to each of the Arduinos attached to the host. The Arduinos recognize the message as a handshake message and respond with three bytes. The first is the Personality Number that the shield belongs to, the second is the type of shield it is and the third is the number of that kind of shield it is.7.1.1.4 OSCThe server uses OSC messages to orchestrate control between different clients and servers. The OSC messages are: /xyz/n/vx= The Personality Numbery = the board type (1: Brigid, 2: Homados, 3: Hermes, 4: Theia)z= board number of that type within the personalityn= note (0-63)v= velocity (0-1023)7.1.2 ShieldsThere are many different shield that have been designed for use with the Pantheon system. While the functionality of each board differs, they all share a grouping of common traits:• All connectors used are Molex Mini-Fit Jr. which can handle up to 9.0Amps, feature fully isolated terminals, locking housings, low engagement forces, and polarized housings.• All boards are designed to be shields for either the Arduino Uno or Arduino Mega.• The ‘tops’ of all the connectors are always ground.• All boards have a RGB LED that is red while booting, yellow until it completes its handshake, and blue while receiving a message.7.1.2.1 BrigidFigure 21: Brigid Actuator Shield.Brigid is the smallest of the two general purpose actuator boards. Brigid has a RGB status LED, six channels of control of solenoids, DC motors, LED strips or similar devices, and an input jack for an external power source. The board also includes a JST connector for I2C sensors. Each of the channels utilize a PWM pin on the Arduino instead of a simple digital pin for added flexibility.Figure 22: Single Actuator ChannelThe control channels consist of a N-Channel Enhancement Mode Field Effect Transistor whose gate is connected to one of the Arduino Uno’s PWM pins through a 1k resistor. The transistors drain is connected to the output of the jack with a 1N4004 diode to protect the transistor from any fly back current: common when using solenoids. Both the Brigid and Homados Controller boards use this same circuit for each of their channels.7.1.2.2 HomadosFigure 23: Homados Actuator ShieldHomados is the larger of the two actuator controller shields in the Pantheon system and is designed as an Arduino Mega cape. The board supports sixteen channels of actuator control, three JST I2C jacks, and a RGB led. The first fifteen channels of the Homados driver utilizes PWM on the Arduino Mega while the sixteenth channel uses a standard digital pin.7.1.2.3 HermesFigure 24: Hermes Stepper DriverHermes is an Arduino Uno shield designed to control the majority of stepper motors. The Hermes shield provides an interface for two XXXx Darlington Arrays that each contain 8 Darlington pairs. The shield affords control over up to four stepper motors that are either xxx or xxx. 7.1.2.4 TheiaFigure 25: Theia 1.0 - General purpose sensor board.Theia is a general purpose sensor board that was designed to allow for the easy use of eight SR-04 ultrasonic rangefinders.7.2 Embracing the Mechatronics – Compositional ConsiderationsOne of the easiest traps to fall into when composing for mechatronic instruments is to write in the same manner as you would for a human player. -less limitations (sometimes, number of notes played at once, speed)-noisy (sounds of actuators)-lack of expression in traditional senseAll of this boils down to a need to embrace the mechatronic instrument as more than just a robotic version of the instrument that it is; instead it is about looking at the instrument as something entirely new. And not just as a new instrument or an augmented version of the old instrument. Yes, you want to do this, but you also want to view it as a personality. This is very important, in many ways.- You interact with a personality, it responds to you, there is more dialogue that with an instrument which is expected to produce the same result 7.3 Technical NotesThis section discuses technical specifics related to the hardware and software design of the installations and projects introduced in this thesis.7.3.1 Electrical Box - EavesDroppersFigure 26: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronicsThe EavesDropper system is the technological heart of EB. The devices leverage the properties of EM inductance to sense changes in a magnetic field that the device emits. Changes in its own field resulting from external sources creates a voltage difference in the device causing a small current to flow. This signal is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones where it is transduced into acoustic energy in the form of sound. The EavesDropper design priorities were cost effectiveness, simplicity, and reliability. Each system consists of a small metal tin with a pair of Telex headphones plugged into the side. Inside each of the tins, there is a single-coil guitar pickup, a stereo amplifier, a ¼” headphone jack, and a lithium ion battery. The amplifiers are small 1.85 x 2.11 cm breakout boards that house PAM8403 ICs that provide the required signal gain17. The PAM8403’s filter-less architecture allows it to drive a speaker load directly; without the need of any additional gain stages, filtering, or components. They are relatively efficient Class-D amplifiers that consume less power than comparable Class AB or Class A amplifiers. They operate off of a supply voltage between 2.5 and 5.5 volts, allowing them to be powered directly with a Lithium-ion battery.[25] The batteries are rechargeable 3.7V 4000mAh lithium ion batteries. To save space and money, I abstained from the use of battery cases in favor of soldering male JST18 RC battery plugs directly to the terminals of the batteries19. I wrapped the batteries and cables in electrical tape and coated the ends with liquid electrical tape. This insulated the batteries from the metallic case, saved space while providing an interface for hot-swapping the batteries. 7.3.2 Discovery Synth – Technical DetailsThe Raspberry Pi 2 features xxx General Purpose In/Out (GPIO) pins that can be used as either inputs or outputs at a logic level of 3.3V.[23] The Discovery Synth Cape20 allowed for buttons, sensors, and the ability to read analog inputs and is intended to be a generic shield for anyone who wants to pretend that their raspberry pi is an Arduino. Two MCP3008 8-channel 10-bit A/D converters are used to read 16 voltage dividers. 12 buttons, two LEDs and pinouts for a LCD monitor are included on the cape as well. [NV11]	The ensemble used Pure Data[26] to read in the input states of the buttons and pots/sliders and provided the synthesis engine as well. Everyone in the ensemble was able to choose what specific components they used for the buttons and voltage dividers.  Although I used conventional potentiometers for 8 of my voltage dividers I took unconventional approaches to the other 8 voltage dividers and 8 buttons. 7.3.3 Symbiotic SNES - Technical DetailsTwo SNES knock off controllers have their plugs cut off and wires stripped. The SNES controller uses five wires to communicate with the SNES console. The SNES powers the circuitry on the controller with the first two wires which are 5V and GND. The other three pins are for communication: Clock, Latch and Data. Thanks to the XXXXX Arduino library it is just a simple matter of (INSERT CODE) to read in incoming controller data. Once the Arduino knows which buttons are being pressed on the two input controllers it performs its logic before flipping digital pins that are connected to pads with wires soldered into them whose other ends are soldered to each of the button pads of a SNES controller. When the sensing side of the button pad reads 5v it sends an ‘ON’ messages to the SNES, instead of the controller receiving this voltage via the bridging of the two sides of the button, the Arduino mimics this be sending its own voltage to the pad.       As oppose to my other work with SNES consoles, this project is completely portable. The Symbiotic SNES system will work on any production SNES ever made and is not tied to any hardware modifications to the console itself. As the SNES’s internal voltage level is most always 5v, the console lends itself nicely to interfacing with Arduino microcontrollers, in this project the Arduino is directly powered through its output connections to the SNES console.        The SNES controller’s buttons are purely binary, meaning they are either on or off with no alternative: this lends itself nicely to bitwise logic operations. In fact, that is how all of the first mods started out.  If the controller inputs from the two controllers have a bitwise AND performed on them the resulting interaction will be that no messages get sent through unless both controllers are pressing the same button at the same time: which is the “Agree” mode. Likewise, if a XOR is performed on the incoming controller data only buttons that are pressed on a single controller are sent through, but if both controller press the button they cancel each other out and no message is sent to the host.7.3.4 Voltage Slammer - Technical DetailsAll of the devices were bent using the interface. The interface utilized RCA connectors between the circuit bent devices and the interface. This was because of the inexpensive nature of these connectors and the fact that they had two points of connection, as oppose to say, a Banana Jack. RCA jacks have the added benefit of taking up little space on the inside of the unit. This is very important when circuit bending small electronic devices that often have very little extra space in their cases.      After the Toys installation was shown at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo I decided to redesign the interface to feature 16 rotary knobs with built in push buttons and RGB21 LEDs. I replaced the SPST22 toggle switches with large sleeker metal pushbuttons, also with LED’s inside. The current interface is powered by an Arduino Mega and can be either batter powered or powered via USB. It functions both as a controller for specially hacked toys or electronic devices or as a useful tool for hardware hacking and circuit probing/bending. It is designed specifically for working with low voltage DC circuits and can’t handle anything high voltage or high current. Its first eight output channels are PWM23 waves each with a pot controlling intensity (PW) and a switch to cut off the current flow entirely. The first eight outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation.      The next five outputs are very similar to the first eight with the noticeable exception that they have no feedback LEDs, no on/off switches and are arranged on the interface in a separate group. They are intended to be used to control motors in bent devices, or any other bend in which you desire a constant current and don’t want the output to be effected by the master delay pot. When Toys was presented at the Digital Arts Expo these outputs controlled the talking robotic bear. In the rear of the device all 13 outputs are accessible via RCA connectors, with the ring connected to a common ground and the internal pin the hot signal. In addition, there is one additional RCA connection in which both the ring and pin are connected to ground, to allow for easier probing and bending.7.3.5 Computer Music - Additional Notes      One thing that sets Computer Music apart from other approaches to mechatronic instruments is the fact that the original housings for the motors are maintained. Additionally, usually with mechatronic instruments the motors and actuators are used to trigger some sort of musical instrument be it a membrane or a string. Computer music literally amplifies the sounds of the motors themselves as the primary sonic material instead of the physical work done by the motor. Luckily for me, there has been extensive work done in the field of making music from Floppies, HDD’s and CD-ROM drives and I really just had to find the information and implement it. The excellent Arduino library Moppy, written and developed by the programmer SammyIAm, provides an easy to use interface for playing MIDI notes on floppy drives.[27] I was able to create a new internal MIDI bus on my Mac and pipe MIDI messages from Ableton Live to Moppy which in turn controlled the Floppy Drives.      Floppy drives take a four pin power connector that consists of one 12V, one 5V and two GND wires. This is the same pin configuration that is used by the old-school Molex connectors that all HDD’s and CD-ROM drives utilized in the early 2000’s.[28] I grabbed an old computer power supply I had lying about and a perfboard and created three long rails for my two power connections and my ground to which I connected six floppy drives. I built custom connectors and jumpers to fool the floppies into thinking they are connected to a computer and the fun began. Bibliography[1]	N. Wiener, The human use of human beings: cybernetics and society. New York, N.Y: Da Capo Press, 1988.[2]	K. Kwastek, Aesthetics of interaction in digital art. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2013.[3]	B. Moggridge, Designing interactions. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2007.[4]	“Leonardo da Vinci | Italian artist, engineer, and scientist | Britannica.com.” [Online]. Available: https://www.britannica.com/biography/Leonardo-da-Vinci. [Accessed: 15-Feb-2017].[5]	A. M. Fernandez and F. Iazzetta, “Circuit-Bending and the DIY Culture,” Escole Communivações E Artes Universidade São Paulo, 2011.[6]	J. A. Paradiso, J. Heidemann, and T. G. Zimmerman, “Hacking Is Pervasive,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 13–15, Jul. 2008.[7]	Motherboard, Reed Ghazala, the Father of Circuit Bending: Sound Builders. .[8]	“Ghazala.” .[9]	“Circuit_Bending_Build_Your_Own_Alien_Instruments.pdf.” .[10]	“Ghazala.” [Online]. Available: http://www.anti-theory.com/bio/. [Accessed: 15-Feb-2017].[11]	Nicolas Collins, Original Hacking Manual. .[12]	N. Collins, Handmade electronic music: the art of hardware hacking, Second edition. New York: Routledge, 2009.[13]	A. Galloway, J. Brucker-Cohen, L. Gaye, E. Goodman, and D. Hill, “Design for hackability,” 2004, p. 363.[14]	A. McPherson and V. Zappi, “Exposing the scaffolding of digital instruments with hardware-software feedback loops,” in Proceedings of the international conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2015, pp. 162–167.[15]	M. A. Net, “Media Art Net | Kubisch, Christina: Sound Flow Light Source – Forty Pillars and One Room,” 05-Oct-2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.medienkunstnetz.de/works/klang-fluss-licht/. [Accessed: 05-Oct-2016].[16]	R. Ghazala, Circuit-bending: build your own alien instruments. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2005.[17]	A. P. McPherson, A. Chamberlain, A. Hazzard, S. McGrath, and S. Benford, “Designing for Exploratory Play with a Hackable Digital Musical Instrument,” 2016, pp. 1233–1245.[18]	L. Maes, G.-W. Raes, and T. Rogers, “The Man and Machine Robot Orchestra at Logos,” Comput. Music J., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 28–48, 2011.[19]	A. Kapur and M. Darling, “A Pedagogical Paradigm for Musical Robotics.,” in NIME, 2010, pp. 162–165.[20]	A. Kapur, J. Murphy, M. Darling, E. Heep, B. Lott, and N. Morris, “MalletOTon and the Modulets: Modular and Extensible Musical Robots,” New Interfaces Music. Expr., pp. 69–72, 2016.[21]	A. Kapur et al., “The Machine Orchestra,” in ICMC, 2010.[22]	Jay David Bolter and Diane Gromala, Windows and Mirrors: Interaction Design, Digital Art, and the Myth of Transparency. 2003.[23]	“Raspberry Pi GPIO Pin information.” [Online]. Available: http://www.thebox.myzen.co.uk/Raspberry/Understanding_Outputs.html. [Accessed: 16-Nov-2016].[24]	A. Kapur, “A History of Robotic Musical Instruments.,” presented at the International Computer Music Conference, 2005, vol. 31.[25]	“PAM8403.pdf.” .[26]	M. Puckette and others, “Pure Data: another integrated computer music environment,” Proc. Second Intercollege Comput. Music Concerts, pp. 37–41, 1996.[27]	“SammyIAm/Moppy: Musical controller for an Arduino-floppy drive set up.” .[28]	“Drive Power Connectors.” .1 Do It Yourself – The method of building, modifying or repairing things without the direct aid of experts or professionals2 Printed Circuit Boards3 He is editor-in-chief of the Leonardo Music Journal, and a Professor in the Department of Sound at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. 4 Christina used the term ‘electrical walk’ to describe the action of exploring a space’s EM properties by means of EM listening just as one might go on a nature walk. For her, the Electrical Walks are not only for other people to enjoy, but are also an activity she enjoys to do. In fact, she has done Electrical Walks in different cities that have not been opened to the public: they were only experienced by her.  5 In video game design a game is considered to be “on-rail” if the manner the player travels is pre-determined on a line, as if literally on rails. This originally was done to allow for the use of high production backgrounds and higher quality pre-rendered graphics. Over time this technical approach to game design has become a stylistic one that still persists today. Examples of games that are on-rail include the Star Fox, Time Crisis, and The House of the Dead series.6 Normally this is someone pressing the button with their finger, but can also be pulling a lever, walking on a tile, or many other types of interaction events.7 Kanthal A-1 is a resistance heating wire commonly used for the heating element for electronic cigarettes. Kanthal is a ferritic iron-chromium-aluminum allow – FeCrAl alloy – and is characterized by high resistivity and good oxidation resistance.8 The circuit boards are exposed while the buttons, controller jacks and cartridge ports are removed.9 A black box is a device or system that is viewed in terms of its transfer characteristics (inputs and outputs) without any knowledge of its internal workings.10 Red, Green and Blue11 Single pole single throw : a switch that has two states and one channel12 Pulse Wave Modification : A high frequency digital signal that has a variable duty cycle allowing for a pseudo variable voltage.13 Performed fall 2015 with Eric Heep and Daniel Clarke in the CalArts Machine Lab.14 Performed fall 2016 with Kyle McCarthy, Ivy Liu, and Jake Turpin in the CalArts Machine Lab.15 CalArts 2016 – MFA MTIID Alum16 CalArts 2016 – MFA Composition Alum17 The PAM8403 is a 3 watt, Class-D, stereo amplifier that is common and inexpensive.18 Budget interconnection company that is cost effective alternative to Molex. Most commonly seen with battery jacks and plugs in hobbyist projects.19 I do not recommend anyone does this themselves.20 A Cape for a Raspberry Pi is similar to what a Shield is to the Arduino. It Is a small printed circuit board that is designed to be attached to the GPIO headers of the Raspberry Pi and provides some sort of additional functionality usually though the use of IC’s and/or discrete electrical components.21 Red, Green and Blue22 Single pole single throw : a switch that has two states and one channel23 Pulse Wave Modification : A high frequency digital signal that has a variable duty cycle allowing for a pseudo variable voltage.[NV1]intro had four sections:intro - 4 paragraphs, funnel down to thesis statement.-motivation - personal and in the field.-define overviewthen outline (with the singular picture as well)- interaction in gallery art is becoming more and more common- Often how we [NV2]Revise, should it indeed be there?[NV3]Cool, so what?[NV4]Is this true and/or worth mentioning?[NV5]Extend a little bit[NV6]Yea this is crap…[NV7]Need to review[NV8]This can be stronger[NV9]So yea, this is all pretty much bad[NV10]Your big ideas and final conclusions.[NV11]Combine these two sentances--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------xv