California Institute of the ArtsElectromagnetic Translucenceexplorations in human-circuit interaction modalitiesbyNathan Villicaña-ShawA thesis submitted in partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Fine ArtsHerb Alpert School of MusicMusic Technology: Interaction, Intelligence & Design2017
Supervisory CommitteeDr. Ajay Kapur							MentorDr. Owen Vallis						Committee MemberDr. Spencer Salazar							Committee Member

AbstractThis thesis presents a variety of approaches for complicating, simplifying or exposing human- circuit interaction within the context of interactive installation art, interface design, and mechatronic performance. The goal of this research is twofold: first is to develop new techniques for creating situations with electronic devices[NV1] and imbue a since of discovery, wonder, and wilder;  second is to develop a vernacular for navigating human-circuit interaction within the context of the gallery. These methods provide a lens in which to view, discuss, and interoperate interactive art.[NV2]	      After a brief background of related work, this thesis presents several different approaches to human-circuit interaction in the gallery with example installations. Next, a variety of different approaches to electronic interface design are presented along with their corresponding motivations. A sampling of mechatronic performances and a contextualization of some of the previously discusses works are discussed in the next section. After the Conclusion an appendix is included to provide a sampling of code, implementation, construction, and secondary themes.      The primary goals of this work include (1) presenting a corpus of work that is concerned with human-circuit interaction modalities (2) exploring the creation and dissolution of abstractions separating us from circuitry (3) exploring the idea of mechatronic/electronic personalities (4) exploring performances that feature mechatronic performers performing for a mechatronic audience.
AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank my loving, and supportive, family that have always believed in my abilities and have given me the freedom to explore what interests me. My mentors, Ajay Kapur and Owen Vallis who have always had my best interest in mind and who have given me the chance to prove myself and my abilities.      To all the professors, instructors, and faculty at CalArts who have guided, inspired and motivated me throughout the past four years. Tom Jennings for helping me to break free from the technology in my art. Sarah Roberts for helping me to start thinking about space, sound, and interaction in new ways. Spencer Salazar, for his XXXX. Clay Chaplin for xxxx.      All the friends and colleagues that I have studied, collaborated, and learned from throughout the years. Mason for inspiring me to think in larger scale, and for his respectful grace as an artist and human. Amber for xxxx. David Howe for xxx. Dexter for xxxx.      Artist and Scientists who have inspired me. Peter Blasser, Evelina Dominitch, Dimitry Gelfand, Mike Leize, Shaurja Benaurje, ……      Wolfgang, my dear friend, who is longer with us for his friendship, support, and talks.       Those who I lost contact with but influenced me artistically: John Meagher, Jarred xxx, Pat xxxx, Keith Bishop, Tessa Bishop, xxx, xxx, xxx.      Teachers that have influenced my education: 
ContentsAbstract	vAcknowledgments	viiContents	ixList of Figures	xiiiList of Tables	1Chapter 1	Introduction	41.1	Thesis Overview & Outline	4Chapter 2	Background	72.1	Leonardo DaVinci - The Artist Scientist	72.2	Nicola Tesla’s Coils – Visualizing Electricity	92.3	Circuit Bending & Hardware Hacking	102.3.1	Reed Ghazala – Circuit Bending	112.3.2	Nicholas Collins – Hardware Hacking	122.4	Christina Kubisch - Eavesdropping on Electromagnetic Systems	132.5	Peter Blasser - Embracing the Indeterminate	162.5.1	Paper Circuits	172.6	The Machine Lab at CalArts	182.7	Philosophy for Hardware Development	202.8	Artistic Constraints	21Chapter 3	Human Circuit Interaction in the Gallery	233.1	Introduction	243.2	Electrical Box and the Interaction Rail	253.2.1	Guiding Interaction on a Rail	263.3	Open Interaction	313.3.1	Cathode Ray Tubes: Installation Description	313.3.2	Any-To-Any Interaction	323.4	Anti-Interactivity	323.4.1	No Humans Allowed: Installation Description	323.5	External Interaction	333.5.1	Digital Rain: Installation Description	343.6	Non-Interactive	353.6.1	Computer Music: Installation Description	353.7	Conclusion	37Chapter 4	Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCI	384.1	Introduction	384.2	Abstractive/Deconstruction	404.2.1	Discovery Synth: Project Overview	404.2.2	Abstracting Buttons	414.2.3	Deconstructing and Abstracting Potentiometers	424.3	Circuit Exposure for Direct HCI	444.3.1	Repackaging and Re-appropriation	454.3.2	Approach to Interaction	464.4	Re-Appropriation of Conventions	464.4.1	Modular SNES: Project Description	464.5	Deception	474.5.1	Symbiotic SNES: Project Description	474.5.2	“6 x 9  = 42” and the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot	484.5.3	Limiting Agency with EavesDroppers	484.6	Orchestrating Circuitry (One-To-Many)	504.6.1	The Voltage Slammer: Project Description	504.6.2	OneToFour	514.7	Conclusion	51Chapter 5	Approaches to Human-Robot Performances	525.1	Mechatronic Instruments played by Humans	535.1.1	Beatles	535.1.2	Hello Humans	535.1.3	Robots Improvisational Jam	545.2	Humans Leading Intelligent Mechatronics	545.2.1	Robot Whispers - Performance Description	545.2.2	Hedonism Bot – Performance Description	555.3	Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves	565.3.1	Computer Music – As a Performance	565.3.2	Antisocial – As a Performance	565.4	Exclusive Robot Centric Performances	565.4.1	Mechatronic Personalities	565.4.2	No Humans Allowed – As a Performance	575.5	Conclusion	57Chapter 6	Conclusion	586.1	Summary	586.2	Primary Contributions	586.3	Final Thoughts	59Chapter 7	Appendix	607.1	Pantheon Mechatronic System	607.1.1	Server	607.1.2	Shields	617.2	Embracing the Mechatronics – Compositional Considerations	657.3	Project Backgrounds	667.3.1	Retrono – Virtue of Experimentation	667.4	Technical Notes	677.4.1	Electrical Box - Radio Receivers	677.4.2	Electrical Box - EavesDroppers	687.4.3	Modular SNES – Technical Details	727.4.4	Discovery Synth – Technical Details	727.4.5	Symbiotic SNES - Technical Details	737.4.6	Voltage Slammer - Technical Details	747.5	Secondary Themes	757.5.1	Our effect on electrical systems	757.5.2	Interactive Art	757.5.3	Electrical Box - Complication of Radio Interaction	76Bibliography	80
List of FiguresFigure 1: Leonardo DaVinci – Self-portrait, chalk, 1512 on left:	7Figure 2: Tesla Coil	9Figure 3: Bebe and Louis Barron in 1956	11Figure 4: Barron Circuit	12Figure 5: Bent Fest 2012	13Figure 6: Reed Ghalzala with pet Raccoon	14Figure 7: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.	15Figure 8: Zimoun - 157 prepared dc-motors,  cotton balls, cardboard boxes	16Figure 9: Christina Kubisch with one of her listening devices.	17Figure 10: Map from Christina Kubisch’s Milano Electrical Walk in 2009	19Figure 11: Peter Blasser paper circuit with paper dissolved.	20Figure 12: Old. Mr. Grassi designed by Peter Blasser and built by the author	21Figure 13: Peter Blasser - Tocante Solar Powered Synthesizer	22Figure 14: Evelina Domnitch and Dmitry Gelfand	22Figure 15: Machine Lab @ CalArts: home to the MTIID department and the Digital Arts Minor (TOD): more resent picture	23Figure 16: Learning as the difference between a projects complexity and your distance from the tech.	24Figure 17: Graphs of Interaction Graphs	27Figure 18: Eavesdropper from outside	30Figure 19: EB Interaction Rail	32Figure 20: WaveCave gallery as seen from outside when Electrical Box was installed.	33Figure 21: EB grid configuration.	34Figure 22: One of two Listening Stations	35Figure 23: Cathode Ray Tubes - 3 unit version.	37Figure 24: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo	40Figure 25: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo	41Figure 26: Discovery Synth	46Figure 27: Approach to removing physical abstractions for Discovery Synth’s buttons and pots	47Figure 28: Resistive Materials research for the Discovery Synth sliders	48Figure 29: Discovery Synth as one controller for the Yin~Yang interactive installation in 2015.	49Figure 30: Second version of the Retrono Synthesizers	50Figure 31: The Voltage Slammer	54Figure 32: Brigid Actuator Shield.	66Figure 33: Single Actuator Channel	67Figure 34: Homados Actuator Shield	67Figure 35: Theia 1.0 - General purpose sensor board.	69Figure 36: EavesDroppers Circuit Diagram	73Figure 37: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronics	74Figure 39: Modular SNES, first of three designs.	76Figure 40: Transduction and Gain steps in signal flow for installation	80
List of TablesTable 1: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities	40Chapter 1 IntroductionI am captivated by the power of the electromagnetic spectrum. I am fascinated at the different ways we, as human beings, have developed technology to harness, control, and leverage the awesome power of this spectrum of energy. Likewise, I love analyzing and examining how we have constructed interface to interact with electrical systems. 	We are entering into a new epoch where how we interact with technology is changing as many of our devices begin to exhibit traits of intelligence. As our devices begin to be able to answer back, talk to you, hold up its end of a conversation they are no longer simply inanimate tools, but instead take on an extra property. intro had four sections:intro - 4 paragraphs, funnel down to thesis statement.-motivation - personal and in the field.-define overviewthen outline (with the singular picture as well)1.1  Plugged Inmore and more we spend most of our lives plugged into electronic devices.1.2 EM Interaction1.3 Question the familiar, understand the assumed.1.4  Thesis Overview & Outline
Chapter 2 BackgroundThe installations, performances, and interfaces presented in this Thesis have been inspired by a variety of different artists, movements, and ideas. This chapter provides a history of artists, scientists and ideas that were essential to the genesis of my research as an artist to provide a context for the projects presented. These artists have influenced my artistic practice in a multitude of ways.2.1 Leonardo DaVinci - The Artist ScientistFigure 1: Leonardo DaVinci – Self-portrait, chalk, 1512 on left:Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci was an Italian painter, inventor, engineer, writer, astronomer, mathematician, sculpture, and overall renaissance badass. He is known as the father of paleontology, ichnology, and architecture. He lived from April 15 , 1452 to May 2, 1519 and, more than any other historical figure, epitomized the renaissance humanist artist-scientist.(“Leonardo Da Vinci | Italian Artist, Engineer, and Scientist | Britannica.com”) Point out connection between inter-discipline practice and innovation.Point out we are in a time of accelerated renaissance and it is vitally important to adopt a modern version of the renaissances man.saper vedere – “knowing how to see”: Leonardo believed that one’s eyes were the main avenue to knowledge. 2.2 Circuit Bending & Hardware HackingFigure 2: Bent Fest 2012The circuit bending and hardware hacking communities are of interest to me primarily because of their approach to electronic devices as well as electricity itself. Circuit Bending and Hardware Hacking are both strange, anti-social, punk anarchistic pastimes. Circuit benders, especially, can be electronics amateurs that don’t know much about electricity in general. Yes, they might have a Swiss cheese internet knowledge that is very specific to, let’s say, a Speak and Spell but they might know about Kirchhoff’s laws or how to go about simple node-based circuit analysis.	They learn enough to not hurt themselves and to have fun and they void the warranty of their electronic keyboard and kill an afternoon crafting a peculiar artifact that is likely to continue getting ignored and unloved and eventually thrown out. (perhaps this speaks too specifically to my own personal experience). Usually people who embark of the craft of circuit bending do so more for the process and the artifact that is the result than the practical use of the finished object. Yes, I have met some composers, produces and the like who are interested in circuit bent toys, but now with the advent of downloadable sample packs that you can use with any sampler found in Ableton, Logic, Cubase and other DAWS not nearly as many people commit to building the ‘instruments’ themselves.2.2.1 Reed Ghazala – Circuit BendingFigure 3: Reed Ghalzala with pet RaccoonMr. Ghazala is often referred to as the ‘father’ of circuit bending, although I believe that perhaps a more befitting title is the first face of circuit bending. Nothing against Reed, but, to his own admittance his stumbled upon circuit bending in a manner that can only be described as naively coincidental. He experienced an event that thousands of people have experienced before but just so happened to be just the right kind of nerd to explore the reason why. He was an explorer in his own right.	He set the tone for the movement, he was no scientist, he did not do well in school and to be honest does not produce the most interesting circuit bent devices, he was a hippy, a rebel. The idea that it is okay to break something, the idea that you can start a project without knowing what you will end up doing or create is very appealing to be. The idea that you can start doing something that you don’t know anything about and can figure it out as you go is really empowering and my main take away from the circuit bending movement.  (Motherboard; “Ghazala”; “Circuit_Bending_Build_Your_Own_Alien_Instruments.pdf”) 2.2.2 Nicholas Collins – Hardware HackingFigure 4: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.The fact that I only did one project out of Nicolas Collins book and never even finished is a testament to how it changed my life. It is what I tell student artists to go out and buy when they come to me for tutoring in electronics because I never finished it. I tried, several times, it’s just too good.	Let me explain. It was such an inspiration for me that whenever I browsed through it I Coming from the academic world Nicholas approached things somewhat differently than Reed1. [TODO insert background on Nicholas Collins]. With his feet firmly set in the academic world Collins brings a certain integrity to the field of hardware hacking and circuit bending. 2.3 Christina Kubisch - Eavesdropping on Electromagnetic SystemsFigure 5: Christina Kubisch with one of her listening devices.There is nothing I can think of about the work of the Berlin based artist Christina Kubisch (b. 1948) that does not appeal to me. It contains all of the elements that constitute fascinating and wondrous sound art. It creates an intimate experience that can be grand and shared by many people at the same time. It has technology at its core (somewhat mysterious technology at that) but it does not shove the technology into your face. At the same time the technology is necessary to tell the narrative and impart the experience it is attempting to enforce.       A truly multidiscipline artist, Christina studied electronic music at the Milan Conservatory of music but was unsatisfied with how ‘conventional’ her classes were and what she was required to learn. She decided to enroll in the Technical University in Milan and began to take classes in electronics. As described in an interview for cabinet magazine Christina describes how she stumbled upon, what has become her magnum opus. “One day I bought a telephone amplifier, a little cube that you could put next to your telephone so that you could hear it without having the receiver in your hand. The cube was switched on, and when I came into the laboratory, it started to make really strange sounds in my handbag. I took it out and asked my professor what was going on. He explained to me that there were coils in this little cube, and that they picked up some of the machines in the room. It was like a flash in my mind. It was exactly at the time when I wanted to get away from performance and start producing installations.”      She goes on to explain how her excitement over the technology commanded her installation configurations.“In my early installations, there were people wandering around with these little cubes in their hands, walking along thick electrical cables that had sounds running through them. I didn’t think about using the sounds of the outside world. I had no idea about electricity in general or that it could make interesting sounds. I just used the system of electromagnetic induction as a way of amplifying musical sounds.”      After five years she started working with an Italian headphone manufacturing company and commissioned 20 custom headphones with her electromagnetic snooping technology installed inside of the cases of large soviet styled headphones. She made several installations showcasing the custom headphones but eventually the set got destroyed/stolen and she shelved the project. Almost a decade later she found a sponsor that would her help to develop the technology and create a new/better system, in 1999 at the Potsdamer Platz in Berlin she used the new system in a large installation” Forty Pillars and One Room” in a large parking garage. She wrapped lengths of cables covered in green phosphorescent paint around forty of the free standing pillars in the parking garage creating the trunks of trees as seen from underground. Each of the pillars emitted a different sequence of tones: with all of them sharing the common theme of water. The participants particular sonic experience was dependent on their position within the space and the specific time of day (Net). Forty Pillars and One Room interestingly uses electricity and concrete to create a world of implied nature. The sounds Christina curated created a sonic landscape in direct juxtaposition to the electrical and industrial materials she used for construction.      She began to incorporate electromagnetic induction in her sound installations in the late 1970’s as she began investigating EM fields and electronics. and finished developing a system for leveraging magnetic fields for acoustic transmission in 1980. But she did not study electronics or electrical systems in the university days. Instead she took night workshops [TODO: Add in the specific workshop] on electronics because she was drawn to it. She wanted to incorporate electronics into her work and sought out the knowledge she needed to then create the art that appealed to her.  (“CABINET // Invisible Cities: An Interview with Christina Kubisch”)2.3.1 Christina Kubisch’s Electrical WalksFigure 6: Map from Christina Kubisch’s Milano Electrical Walk in 2009In 2004, Kubisch officially began exhibiting works under the umbrella name of Electrical Walks. Her Electrical Walks, although closely related to her previous installations, featured different source material. Instead of planting electromagnetic signals in wiring that people were tasked with listening to via her devices, she decided to allow the environment to create the fields for her. When researching for a new walk, she embarks into an urban center with an EM listening device. She walks around the city and maps the magnetic activity. She constructs EM2 maps after thoroughly exploring all of the surrounding areas. The maps show areas of sonic interest and suggest routes to tour the cities magnetic features. Copies are made and handed out to the public along with her custom built magnetic field listeners.      Christina used the term ‘electrical walk’ to describe the action of exploring a space’s EM properties by means of EM listening just as one might go on a nature walk. For her, the Electrical Walks are not only for other people to enjoy, but are also an activity she enjoys to do. In fact, she has done Electrical Walks in different cities that have not been opened to the public: they were only experienced by her.  2.4 Peter Blasser - Embracing the IndeterminateFigure 7: Peter Blasser paper circuit with paper dissolved.In a world dominated by rigid rules and equations it is refreshing to enter into Peters unique take on circuit design with his paper circuits and point to point soldering. His guide-traces curve and arch around the circuit creating a rats-nest of connections, and possible bridges. About a third of the components values are left to the discretion of the builder and you quickly run into Peters quirky terminology (harry caps, X resistors, etc.). Although it might seem crude and amateurish at the first glance, the instrument is really well designed. It boasts stereo output and an amazing range of possible acoustic manipulation via its inset speakers and resonate properties and, perhaps most importantly, plenty of character. The random components ensure that each birthing of the Old Mr. Grasser sounds different.2.4.1 Paper CircuitsFigure 8: Old. Mr. Grassi designed by Peter Blasser and built by the authorI had the pleasure of meeting Peter Blasser at a workshop I attended at CalArts in 2015. Talking to him about his approach to circuit design and building the Old Mr. Grassi synthesizer with him was very influential in my design and approach to the Discovery and Retrono Synthesizers I built later that year. The ideas and approaches of Peter Blasser allowed me to apply circuit bending techniques and approaches to circuit intersection into premeditated projects. It allowed me to justify the bridging of those two worlds. Peters circuits are unstable, unpredictable and full of character. His electronic diagrams are hand drawn using his own symbols for many components and often times specific values are not specified but instead a suggested range is given for a component. Becoming one with the InstrumentFigure 9: Peter Blasser - Tocante Solar Powered Synthesizer2.5 The Machine Lab at CalArtsFigure 10: Machine Lab @ CalArts: home to the MTIID department and the Digital Arts Minor (TOD): more resent pictureThe California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) Machine Lab is the hub of the MTIID department as well as the Digital Arts Minor. Besides being the technological hub for the institute the Machine lab is home to the Machine Orchestra and the 10 mechatronic instruments the Orchestra consists of.(Kapur and Darling; Kapur, Murphy, et al.; Kapur, Darling, et al.)       Over the summer of 2016 I was hired by the MTIID faculty at the CalArts to repair and reassemble/integrate nearly a half dozen or so mechatronic personalities that resided in the Machine Lab. I had no idea what condition the instruments were in and what my time would be spent doing. I had hopes of getting everything working perfectly and maintaining the integrity of the department. 	I spent the first few weeks cleaning the machines, polishing, and tightening. I took careful note as to how they were assembled and what their capabilities were. Eventually I was tasked to prioritize my efforts to working on two specific robots. Lydia and JackBox. Timpin had his hand in the creation of both of these machines. JackBox was created for the Kronoz Quartet, was unable to find a home and ended up staying on loan to the MTIID department. JackBox had been sitting in the front of the Machine Lab for as long as I have been at CalArts and I was under the impression that it no longer worked. Lydia, was once glorious, but the 2016 spring semester and Digital Arts Expo had taken its toll on the once proud centerpiece of the Machine Lab. 2.6 Philosophy for Hardware DevelopmentFigure 11: Learning as the difference between a projects complexity and your distance from the tech.Over my time as an artist, I have refined an approach for developing the hardware and software that I use for my installations, interfaces, and projects.  First I begin a research phase where the goal is to learn as much about the technology required for my project as possible.  This begins with a few weeks digging deep into the topic; intellectually, by reading about the technology, as well as physically, by building prototypes and conducting experiments.  I approach the mechanisms from the lowest level and work upwards.  For instance, when learning how to design and manufacture printed circuit boards, I spent many months experimenting with etching my own copper clad utilizing various DIY3 and hobbyist approaches before I learned proper circuit design using EAGLE CAD and PCB4 fabrication houses.  When the low level experimental prototypes fail and I understand the reasons why; I take a step back and see if there is anything I can do to simplify my technical approach.  I repeat the process over and over again until I am confident in my chosen approach: completing the research phase. Next I begin the development process.  Incorporating aesthetics, I start developing a production design that both functions as I intended and looks good.      All of my works are explorations in one or two concepts. The concepts can take the form of a specific technology, an emotional state, a chord progression, the use of a specific tool, etc. Electrical Box for me was primarily an exploration in guiding gallery interaction.      The initial EavesDropper designs were not as streamlined as the final versions. When I began working on the project, I built and designed as much of the circuitry ‘from scratch’ as possible. In the case of the guitar pickup, for instance, I experimented with different size inductor coils instead of the pickups. Likewise, I tested many amplification configurations, including op-amps, transistors, as well as various breakout boards and even guitar amplifiers. With each iteration the problem was approached from a different angle. After a few successful versions of the technology was built and I was able to develop an understanding of the concepts behind the circuitry, I finally started drafting my production model. The early exploratory designs proved vitally important. They allowed me to better understand the underlying electronic mechanisms and helped to streamline the final design.2.7 Artistic ConstraintsOur societal and personal relationships with electricity are complex, strange, ever changing and a constant source of inspiration for me. In 2016 we are very removed from electricity and circuitry in its raw ‘natural’ form. In our daily lives, we generally press a button or interact with another form of abstraction that then operates on the circuitry that is always hidden from view. It is rare that we find ourselves in a situation where we are directly interacting with circuitry or electricity. This has been the case since the introduction of electrical systems. This is with good reason; electrical energy has the capacity to harm us physically.  Since the War of the Currents starting in the late 1890’s between Tesla and Edison, where public electrocutions of animals and pets were performed in the streets, electricity has been associated with danger and death to a large portion of the population (“The War of the Currents”).       In almost all cases we are concerned with the result of electronic work instead of the electricity itself. For example, the computer I am typing my thesis on right now, which uses electrical energy to conduct its computations, is more useful than the electrical arcs bursting out of a Tesla Coil: even though the Coil consumes orders of magnitude more electricity than my laptop.  To give another example, the lightbulb that is hanging above me right now is functional as a result of the light produced by the electrical work done on the filament: the electricity itself is not directly providing us with light, instead, the light is a byproduct of heat produced by current flowing inside the bulb.      As an installation artist, I am both interested in complicating as well as simplifying our most common electronic interaction modalities. The majority of my installations and research prior to Electrical Box (EB) explored simplifying our relationship with electricity by removing abstractions and presenting more direct interaction with circuitry. EB, instead, complicates our relationship with the radio by inserting additional steps into the signal chain, forcing us to navigate additional abstraction layers.The following list of constraints I have applied to my work as an installation artist.• Never tell the visitor what to do.• The work must complicate or simplify an electro-magnetic system to bring light the systems inherent properties.• The work never explains itself, but leaves itself open to the search for interpretation. 
Chapter 3 Human Circuit Interaction in the GalleryIn this chapter, several of the authors installations are presented in terms of their approach to human-circuit interaction in the gallery.  The first section Interaction Rails presents Electrical Box as an example [NV3]of guiding participants through a series of sequential interactions. Next, Open Interaction presents Cathode Ray Tubes as an example of creating an interaction structure that is simple, open, flexible, and branching. Deception presents the Symbiotic SNES installation as a project that revisions familiar interfaces and games through the manipulation of control messages. Unwelcoming Spaces presents No Humans Allowed as an example of a hostile environment that discourages interaction with the installation. The final section explores non-interactive approaches with Computer Music as the case study.InstallationStanceInteraction ModalityApproach to CircuitryElectrical BoxNeutralPassiveObservationalCathode Ray TubesHuman-CentricSubversive AugmentationSimplification, Semi-exposureNo Humans AllowedCircuit-CentricAggressive, HostileSemi-exposure with Observation from AfarComputer MusicNeutral (with human-centric and circuit-centric components)NoneTotal ExposureChroma Temporal Surveillance BotJudgmentalSymbiotic SNESDigital RainNeutralNone      Dynamic/Reactive to outside data3.1 Interaction RailsExhibits that present “Interaction Rails” have multiple ways participants have to interact with the space which must occur in a specific order. If someone skips a step in the interaction rail, they are unable to continue and will not experience the installation as intended. Thus, these types of installations need to guide the participant along the rail in some manner.3.1.1 Electrical Box – Installation DescriptionFigure: Electrical Box - WaveCave Gallery September 9th-19th 2016 [TODO better picture]Electrical Box presents a silent room ordained with over 1000’ of instrument cables hanging from the rigging grid. Small, white Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) flicker at the ends of the cables suspended in air. Several pairs of headphones hang on the walls in the far corners of the gallery. Viewers are expected to walk to the end of the room and put on the headphones along with the attached metal tins. At first participants only hear faint static but after walking along the hanging cables radio broadcasts can be heard emanating from the cables hanging in the gallery. music in your headphones. 3.1.2 Approach to InteractionIn Electrical Box there is a singular interaction rail5 that I am attempting to guide viewers though. People can deviate from the rail, but if they are unable to skip a step and if they do not follow the rail to the end, they miss a significant aspect of the installation.  In an attempt to avoid presenting, explicate written or semiotic instructions as to how the gallery goes is to interact with the installation       l, several methods were used to encourage gallery viewers to ‘stay on track’. This included the strategic placement of lighting, installation hardware, and interface design.Figure 13: Required interaction for Electrical Box.The signage for Electrical Box is presented as clues to aid the visitor in following the interaction rail. The simple sign outside of the gallery, as seen in figure 20, only discloses the name of the installation, the artist, and that the installation is ‘electro-magnetic’ and ‘interactive’. Electromagnetism is mentioned for its romanticism and hints of adventure and excitement while ‘interactive’ tells the visitor they will have to participate in the space in some capacity. This helps with steps II, II and IV. Knowing that the installation is interactive in nature people will be looking for the interactive element, aiding in noticing the headphones and putting the headphones on. As the headphones are attached to the eavesdroppers and no audio is generally head when they are donned, the knowledge that the space is interactive helps the participant to use the eavesdroppers on the cables hanging in the space.      Although the installation utilized over 1000’ feet of cable, 35% of the gallery was designated as free space. EB utilized empty space in two different ways: by creating a boarder and viewing posts. The entire outside rows and columns of the grid were left void of cables (see figure 16) and this outside boarder helped gallery viewers to enter into the space, approach the headphones, and to explore the space: aiding in steps I, III, and V.  The frame functioned as a walkway around the installation; helping to guide viewers though the interaction rail while softening the transition into the gallery by allowing intermediate commitment to the space.  In addition to the walkway surrounding the installation, EB also featured a total of nine ‘listening ports’ that each allowed a gallery viewer to stand, un-harassed by hanging cables amidst the installation to listen to a sampling of the different signals present. This primarily aided with step V by encouraging viewers to walk into the network of cables and to explore the interior. The open preferred listening areas game people a place to go, destinations within the whole: providing a more engaging experience.Figure 14: EB spacial layout.Figure 15: One of two Listening Stations3.1.2.1 Lighting"A painter should begin every canvas with a wash of black, because all things in nature are dark except where exposed by the light."  -- Leonardo da Vinci“I will love the light for it shows me the way, yet I will endure the darkness for it shows me the stars.” -- Og MandinoThe approach to lighting in EB is as Mandino foreshadows, a tool to show people the way, to guide viewers along the rail. At the terminus of each of the EM transmitters is a white LED that mirrors the ‘audio’ signal inside of the cables. Meant to be the primary visual draw, the LED’s 5mm white through-hole LED’s were coated in plastic dip along with the ‘phantom-load’ resistor. Seven LEDs were concentrated in the rear of the installation space: each grid segment in the back row had its own LED. The remaining nine LED’s were distributed in an even manner in the front 7 rows, leaving a single row buffer between the formation in the rear and the random scattering in the foreground. This, along with the seven LEDs in the rear, created a focal point that encouraged folks to enter into the space and gave importance to the rear of the room.       There were two forms of light originating from the WaveCave doors that proved impactful to the installation: frame leakage and open door. Frame leaking, from in-between, under and above the entrance doors, was unfortunately unavoidable due to the construction of the doors themselves. Each of the two French doors are single pieces of ¼” glass; with at least a ¼” gap on all four sides to ensure that they do not come into contact with any other surface: I could stick a pinky finger between the two doors. (see figure xxxx) I covered the doors with black construction paper to prevent the outside light from shining through, but was unable to prevent the leakage that framed the doors themselves. With no real way to completely eliminate the boarder leakage, I looked for ways I could leverage it; I decided to add ‘peep’ holes on the doors. 	The second source of door light was far more impactful to the user experience. When the doors are opened the gallery is flooded with outside luminescence. The large glass doors also take a very long time to close. (TODO: measure how long. All of this was very beneficial to the individual that enters into the gallery space but ended up being quite disruptive to gallery viewers already interacting with the space.       After I finished setting up the installation, I soon realized that the EavesDroppers were obscured by darkness and the hundreds of feet of instrument cables in the room. They were not readily apparent and ran the risk of not being noticed. After your eyes adjusted to the dim lighting of the space you are naturally drawn to the flickering LEDs and the hanging cables. There were adjustable spotlights in the gallery, but they immediately dominated the space when turned on as they were far too bright. I improvised with two clip on lamps I had lying around along with some low wattage energy saving bulbs. I created 8” tubes out of the black construction paper that I used to block out the door and some gaff tape to make my own dim spotlights. After some meticulous positioning in the grid, I was able to get my makeshift spotlights shinning down on the corners providing just the right amount of illumination after adjusting the length of the tube.3.2 Open InteractionThis approach presents any different ways to effect the installation and refrains from establishing a hierarchy of value over the varied interaction modalities.3.2.1 Cathode Ray Tubes - Installation DescriptionFigure 16: Cathode Ray Tubes - 3 unit version.Cathode Ray Tubes is used as an example of presenting a broad electrical system with many different optional interaction modalities.  As an Open Interaction installation, Cathode Ray Tubes does not favor one specific way to interact with its technology but merely wants participants to participate.  Cathode Ray Tubes creates a video feedback loop out of four CRT TV’s and four NES knock-off consoles (Retrons). Cathode Ray Tubes was initially exhibited in the WaveCave Gallery at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia California from April 5th, 2016 through April 11th, 2016. Subsequently, the installation has been shown at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo and is currently installed in the Kadenze Inc. corporate headquarters in Valencia, California.3.2.2 Interaction DesignThe video produced by the Retrono devices can be affected by gallery goers in many different ways:• By standing within 3 feet of any of the interfaces the gallery viewers own electromagnetic field effects the output of the synths.• By waving a hand over the device, this effects are more profound.• By touching the devices users have more agency over the resulting synthesis• By moving a box, repositioning it in relation to its TV will change the result.• By touching multiple boxes at one time the results change. • People touching people touching boxes will result in different effects.There is nothing in the gallery that values one form of interaction over another and the experience of interaction is designed to be one of discovery. The desired interaction is both none and all of the bullet points presented above. It is most important that the viewer discovers their own unique relationship with the space and the artifacts and is able to forge their own backstory and explanation of the space.3.3 DeceptionThis section examines installations that attempt to deceive its participants. Symbiotic SNES presents a familiar interface that behaves in unexpected ways while 6*9=42 hides its true motives from the participant.3.3.1 Symbiotic SNES3.3.2 6 * 9 = 423.4 Unwelcoming SpacesIf the definition of an interactive installation is only realizable with the agency of a visitor: I propose that an anti-interactive installation is an installation that when observed by a visitor loses its facilities and ceases to function. NHA’s mechatronic personalities do everything in their power to get people to leave and attempt to create an uncomfortable, unnerving hostile environment. No Humans Allowed (NHA) is an example of a circuit-centric interaction architecture. NHA’s mechatronic personalities react with aggression or silence with the presence of a human. In the since that the installation is in its most active state when no-one is present to observe the system I am presenting NHA as an anti-interactive installation.3.4.1 No Humans Allowed: Installation DescriptionNo Humans Allowed creates a community of mechatronic personalities that reside in the “gated” WaveCave community. The personalities are xenophobic: reacting to outsiders via paralysis or violence. When the presence of a human is detected, the community breaks down and no longer functions harmoniously. The result is a hostile space that outsiders are not able to enter without being either attacked or shunned by the society residing within. Each of the six mechatronic sound sculptures (personalities) are constructed from extruded aluminum, acrylic, ultrasonic rangefinders, solenoids, DC motors and LED’s. The personalities are either hanging from the grid or resting on the floor depending on their size and construction. The ultrasonic rangefinders allow each personality to detect the presence of gallery viewers who will affect their behavior. When no outside presence is detected, all members of the community are alive, active, and productive. The presence of a human or ‘other’ disrupts the community. If the outsider gets too close to any specific sculpture, the personality will either become paralyzed by hate and fear (turn off) or will attempt to “violently” deter the intruder (loud, abrupt, a-rhythmic noises). Either way, the personality will be so preoccupied by the presence of the ‘other’ it will no longer contribute to the community as a whole, disrupting the harmony of society. No Humans Allowed hopes to shine light on the danger of xenophobic ‘other’ thinking that is becoming more and more common in the UK with Brexit and the United States with the election of Trump. With the rise of mechatronics, robots, AI the question of AI morality is becoming a topic of discussion in more and more circles. Do we want our robotic children to exhibit violent, isolationist, bigoted tendencies or do we want them to be accepting, loving and caring to all other forms of live and intelligence?      Three of the robotic personalities are standing sculpture constructed out of 80/20 extruded aluminum beams, three different banks of 6 solenoids and four stepper motors. The other three personalities are motor mobiles: the top is two pieces of clear acrylic cut in a circle., there is an Arduino onboard that controls 6 5V 3200rpm DC motors that each have a white LED soldered between its two leads. The gallery consists of three pair of personalities with each pair containing one mobile and one standing sculpture. When no ‘other’ is detected in the proximity of the sculptures the standing and hanging personalities chirp in unison, each solenoid triggering is mirrored by a motor twitching in the hanging personality.  However, as soon as someone is detected the link between the two is broken as the more aggressive standing sculpture attempts to deter the invader while the hanging personality Is too paralyzed by fear and hatred to do anything.3.4.2 No Humans Allowed – Interaction Design3.5 Non-InteractiveThis section looks a two different approaches to creating installation art that is non-interactive. Digital Rain is a dynamic installation whose activity is determined by the current weather patterns from across the United States of America. The second example, Computer Music, is a static installation where an ensemble of mechatronic instruments perform a composition for eight-hours throughout the day. 3.5.1 Digital Rain – DynamicFigure 17: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo.Digital Rain is a data driven art installation, examining the crossroads of algorithmic and generative music, emergence patterns, data sonification, and technology driven systems of expression. 192 electromagnetic relay switches are arranged in a grid and mounted onto a wall. The relays are orchestrated by 6 Arduino Megas which are networked together and controlled by a hidden host computer.      Weather conditions from a randomly selected meteorological station on the globe is collected by a Python script. A text-to-speech program announces the location and selected aspects of the weather report through a speaker that sits in front of the installation. Meta conditions (sunny, rain, etc.) select the base composition algorithm while the performance specifics are a factor of the forecasts wind speed, humidity, temperature and pressure. Digital Rain utilizes the mechanical ticking of the relays switching as the sonic source material for the piece. The relays, because of their precision and speed, are able to actuate fast enough to produce sustained pitch. This in addition to their idiosyncratic rhythmic snaps allows for us to create a wide variety of soundscapes. When the generative composition comes to a close, the system resets and a new station is polled.3.5.1.1 Approach to ActuationThis installation attempted to directly sonify weather conditions through the use of electromagnetic relay switches. The playback speed of the sonification was mapped to the temperature of the current station: with a slower playback when the weather is cooler. The humidity dictated the density of notes, with a higher humidity resulting in more per minute. 	The installation cycles through stations at a steady pace, only lingering on a single station for more than a minute if networking errors occur. This is to bring to light the dynamic, reactive nature of the installation. Additionally, with the text-to-speech announcing the weather conditions when a new station is selected the installation does a good job of explaining itself.[NV4]3.5.2 Computer Music – DeterministicComputer Music is an installation that is not affected by any outside influence. The mechatronic ensemble of floppy disk drives(FDD), hard disk drives (HDD), and CD-ROM drives perform an eight hour long through composed composition throughout the course of the installation.  This chapter introduces the installation Computer Music as an example of an installation that presents an electrical system as a non-interactive system. Computer Music is an ensemble of computer hard drives, floppy disk drives and CD-ROM drives. The installation consisted of a single xxx hour long composition that is performed by the ensemble throughout the course of the day-long extent it was presented at.  Figure 18: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts ExpoI have a similar approach to music composition as I have to installation signage. In general, I don’t like to tell people what to do. When I used to play in bands and would have an idea for a song. I would not write a part for everyone in the band, but would instead write my part, and think about how I would like the song to come across. We were all musicians were in the band to create music together so we would let everyone one else in the band write their own parts. We would collectively brainstorm different possibilities a give each other constructive feedback until we got everything sounding good. We trusted each other to know our own instrument that each other and respected each other’s taste. The music was great.       When writing music for an ensemble taking on the role of the composer the roles are different. Especially in the realm of networked computer music. I gave everyone the same system but vague time based commands like turn this knob to max over 30 seconds. Additionally, the score was determined in real time by a computer program. Each time though the piece the score would be different for each performer. The ensemble was a group of x students and our instructor Clay Chaplin.3.5.2.1 Approach to Actuation3.6 ConclusionThis chapter presented five different approaches to creating interactive environments within a gallery setting with supporting installations. Interaction Rails created a complex set of interactions that must be executed sequentially. Open Interaction looked at an installation that presented a highly reactive system that could be interfaced with in a variety of ways: all with equal validity. Deception talked about installations that attempted to deceive users by either reappropriating familiar interfaces or by disguising their true intentions. Unwelcoming Spaces looked at creating aware spaces which are hostel to gallery viewers and discourage interaction. Non-Interactive looked at using both deterministic and dynamic approach’s to creating interesting non-interactive mechatronic installations. Chapter 4 Approaches for Designing Exploratory Interfaces for HCIIt is important for designers and builders of computer applications to understand the history of transparency so that they can understand that they have a choice.(Jay David Bolter and Diane Gromala 31)Reference windows and mirrors specifically how they talk about interactive art, or digital art is inherently interface design.(Jay David Bolter and Diane Gromala) 4.1 IntroductionElectricity, in its raw form, is of little use: the power of electronics comes from the design and construction of many different types of electronic components that are combined in specific ways to accomplish tasks. As a result, we usually interact with electricity via a physical abstraction. For instance, when you press buttons on your microwave to make popcorn, you press a button that bridges two points in a circuit creating a connection between two parts of the circuit that did not exist before. This causes electrons to flow. You operate through the button which then operates on the circuit, changes the circuits state and electrical work is done.       This chapter discusses different approaches for creating interfaces that challenge interaction conventions between humans and electronic systems. Some of the approaches discussed, such as the Discovery Synth, by removing any abstractions for us to operate on require that the interactee becomes part of the circuitry. Approaches that bypass the interfaces of preexisting electrical systems and insert a puppeteer that controls multiple ‘puppet’ devices are presented with the Voltage Slammer and Toys projects. Techniques that involves the interception and manipulation of control data is discussed with the Synergetic SNES and 4-to-1 projects. The Retrono interfaces are discussed as examples utilizing subtractive manipulation techniques to expose systems to the direct interactions seen with the Discovery Synth project.       This chapter outlines a variety of design processes to facilitate the creation of novel interfaces for interacting with the electromagnetic spectrum.Project NameType of ProjectConvention AddressedApproach To Interface DesignHCIMHCIM NatureDiscovery SynthSynthesizer/InstallationButton/Pot AbstractionsSimplificationDirectInjectiveVoltage SlammerSequencer/Installation/Circuit Bending ToolObject interactionAbstractionAbstractedInjectiveModular SNESCircuit Bent Video Game Console / InstallationExpectationsSubversive Injection and redirectionAbstractedSubversive and InjectiveSynergetic SNESInstallationCo-operative gamingComplicationInterjectedSubversiveRetronoVideo Synthesizer/InstallationObject interactionBypassing interface, simplificationDirectInjectiveEavesdropperSuper-Human Powers/InstallationAgency SimplificationDirectInvestigoryTable 1: Interfaces for challenging human circuit interaction modalities4.2 Abstractive/DeconstructionFigure 19: Discovery SynthThe Discovery Synth (DS) is introduced as an example of taking a deconstructivist approach to interface design as a means of both simplifying and complicating HCI. Simplifying by means of removing casing, and mechanical components; but complicating in terms of creating its own mode of interaction. This design process Bring up fact that the DS is a ceremonial instrument in some regards, if you put graphite powder on your fingers in tandem with the slow response time of the sliders and other elements leaves with a meditative experience when operating the instrument. Additionally, its self-contained battery operated aspects (put speakers, amp, batteries, etc. in it? To make it mobile?).4.2.1 Discovery Synth: Project OverviewThe Discovery Synth is the name of a Raspberry Pi Cape I designed for Clay Chaplin and the Networked Computer Music Ensemble at CalArts in the Fall of 2015. I worked with Clay Chaplin to design a Raspberry Pi Cape that allowed for the use of sensors, LEDs, and all of the tools needed for creating a Raspberry Pi powered synthesizer. The Discovery Synthesizer is a Raspberry Pi powered interface that could be described as a “low-tech” electronic music interface. It features buttons and ‘sliders’ that I constructed personally that utilizes the human bodies electric conductivity.4.2.2 ButtonsFigure 20: Approach to removing physical abstractions for Discovery Synth’s buttons and potsI removed the physical abstraction that separates the action of pressing and the flow of electrical current in a circuit. This is accomplished by removing the mechanical portion of the pushbutton design and by presenting the two ‘ends’ of the circuit on the interface for the interactee to bridge with their fingertips; completing the circuit. As skin is one of the most resistive type of tissue and its specific resistance varies greatly depending on the amount of pushing pressure and the amount of moisture or other contaminants found on the finger, a slight modification of the standard button circuitry had to be used. A large 10M (TODO), resistor is placed after the signal tap (see diagram that is eagle diagram of button circuit). This circuitry allowed the finger to bridge the gap between the two conductive pins, conduct enough current to complete the circuit and be consistently read by the Pi, successfully removing the need for a physical abstraction.4.2.3 PotentiometersFigure 21: Resistive Materials research for the Discovery Synth slidersAs with the buttons, the goal for the construction of the ‘sliders’ was to remove the physical abstraction that stands in the way between the human and the electrons and to create a more direct interaction. The sliders removed the wiper from typical potentiometer or slider design and instead relied on the user physically connecting the leads to a resistive strip (see figure 24).It used 32 gauge Kanthal6 wire. As I wanted to use a material that was as resistive as possible I chose to use the smallest wire I could use before running the risk of injuring the user. The 32 AWG gauge wire that was used measured in as a mere 8 thousandths of an inch thick.      The wire was strung across two bridges; one wooden and one metal. The wire hovers over a strip of copper tape that has an extremely low resistance; less than 1 Ohm a foot. One end of the tungsten wire is attached to system ground while the other end is connected to the power rail on the Raspberry Pi. When the tungsten wire is pressed against the copper tape a voltage divider is created. Unfortunately, as the wires have such low resistance, the voltage dividers draw a fairly large amount of current; 110mA each. Unlike a Microcontroller such as the Arduino, the Raspberry Pi 2 has very low maximum output current ratings on its GPIO pins. The Pi 2 was designed with the spec of 3mA current draw from each of the pins, with a maximum draw of 16mA from a single pin; or 51mA from the entire device.(“Raspberry Pi GPIO Pin Information”) The combined current draw of all eight of my deconstructed sliders was more than the Pi could handle at 880mA. The solution was to add a resistor in series with the tungsten wire with a value of 1k. Unfortunately, this greatly reduced the fidelity of the signal received from the sensor, but with some software smoothing it was usable given the fact that the controller also included eight vanilla pots that could be mapped to anything requiring more precision.      This circuitry allowed for the performer to directly complete the circuitry for the voltage divider without acting through a physical abstraction. There is no barrier between the human finger and the electrons flowing through the synthesizer. This gives this instrument a quality that is somewhat unique within the domain of computer interfaces; it will electronically react differently to the person depending on their unique electrical properties. Figure 22: Discovery Synth as one controller for the Yin~Yang interactive installation in 2015.4.3 Comoflodge and ExposureFigure 23: Second version of the Retrono SynthesizersDirect Human Circuit Interaction (DHCI), for the purpose of this paper. includes any interaction modality that involves our bodies becoming a part of the circuit. The Retrons are literally turned inside out7 and repackaged in custom enclosures. With their circuitry unveiled, and with no software to guide their computational logic, the Retrons becomes very susceptible to electro-magnetic interference. The Retrons are effectively transformed into 8-bit a/v synthesizers that generate their output based on the electrical noise present in the circuit.      Cathode Ray Tubes eliminates all sensors, buttons, knobs and all “middle-men” between the circuit and the user and is directly controlled by the electrical properties of the user’s body.      Four CRT TV’s are arranged in a semicircle each on its own small table. In front of each TV is a video synthesizer with its circuitry exposed. The TV’s and the synths are each connected in a feedback loop with each synth reacting to electric field emanating from the TV it is placed in front of. Gallery goers are invited into the space to discover that their bodies natural electrical properties are all they need to begin seizing control over the installations a/v feedback loop.      Cathode Ray Tubes is an interactive, audio-visual installation that sonifies and visualizes the human bodies electrical properties by demonstrating the effect our bodies have on electronic circuitry. Four modified Retrons are placed in close proximity to CRT TV’s within the installation space. This allows the static electricity produced by the TV’s to interact with the Retrons circuitry, modulating their audio and video outputs. The Retrons are connected in such a way that the video output of each Retron reverberates through all other units in one large feedback loop.  Audio is generated for the space by the Retrons in the same manner as the video. This combined configuration creates a resting state for the installation that is in constant flux as all the Retrons and TV’s are feeding off of each other’s electrical fields.      As the entire system is presented in a manner that emphasizes instability and assailability, the human body becomes an effective controller: due to its inherent electrical properties. Acts such as waving a hand in front of a TV or Retron, touching a TV or a Retron, moving a Retron’s angle or distance from a TV and combinations of the above (touching a Retron and placing your hand a few inches away from a TV) will produce different effects that resonate throughout the feedback loop. If multiple people are in the gallery space, the installation scales nicely as the number and complexity of the effects produce even more drastic results in the Retron feedback loop.      Cathode Ray Tubes is designed to create a space of discovery that invites viewers to forge their own personal experience with the environment and its circuitry, and the goal of the installation is not that each gallery goer manipulates the feedback loop in every possible way, but rather that most gallery participants explore a relationship with the circuitry that feels unique to them. As with Electrical Box this installation did little to directly tell participants how to interact with the space.4.3.1 Camouflage and ExposureDesigning the Retrono is an act of removal and replacement. After completely removing the original plastic cases, the controller ports were de-soldered and the red power LED’s were replaced with white ones.4.4 Re-Appropriation of ConventionsThe Modular SNES is introduced in this section as an example of an interface that challenges HCIM through the re-appropriation of established interaction conventions. 4.4.1 Modular SNES: Project Descriptionis the natural continuation of my work with the circuit bent SNES’s that are used in the installation 19908 I developed in early 2015. My first success with console bending was with an old SNES I had. After carefully opening the case and looking at the circuitry inside I started researching the role each IC played in the workings of the device. After a little poking around I was able to pinpoint the video memory chips which contained the information used for rendering the video and could start experimenting.  Luckily, unlike other consoles I have worked with, with the SNES all the ROM9 and video chips are easily accessible and bends were plentiful.      Wanting to keep the project simple I decided to simply check each via to ground for any sort of effect. I turned the console on and started making connections. About 30% of the vias were receptacle to some sort of modulation. I carefully marked these active connections on a printout of the circuit board I made. After testing everything I reviewed my sheet and narrowed down my choices, I had too many bends to implement. I soldered leads from a ribbon cable to the vias until two ribbons were filled. I cut a little piece of plastic from the back of the case to fit the ribbon cables through and soldered one last wire to the GND rail on the SNES. I closed up the console, put the screws back in place and started gaming.4.5 DeceptionThis section presents the Symbiotic SNES (SSNES) as well as the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) as examples of deceptive HCIM.  First the SSNES’s project is discussed and its method of presenting familiar situations and breaking your expectations. Next the “6 x 9 = 42” installation and the CTSB are presented as a more sinister example where the system makes grand claims on the viewer’s political orientation and publically slanders them for their perceived views.4.5.1 Symbiotic SNES: Project DescriptionThe SSNES intercepts controller messages from two seemingly unaffected controllers and alters the data before sending it to the unaware SNES console. What makes this interface deceptive is the fact that there is no indication to either the SNES or the Player that an agent is acting on the data. The SSNES acts aa saboteur or psy-opp, coloring the data into misinformation. The Symbiotic SNES system is an attempt to create new experiences from familiar technology. Two SNES controllers are attached to an Arduino Mega that mimics a SNES console and decodes the controller information, such as button presses, performs computation on the data, and sends the data in a modified state to an actual SNES. What the system does depends on the current operating mode. NameOperationResultUltimate Co-OpBitwise ANDOnly buttons pressed by both players are passed to the console.Bitwise XOROnly buttons pressed by one player will get passed to the console. (multiplayer mode)Alternating-PressesButton PressesAlternating-TimeTurn LengthsPlayers alternate total control over the character over a set period of time.Two FaceController SplitPlayers alternate control over different parts of the controller.       There have been over a dozen modes created to this date spread between two main types: single player and multiplayer modes. The single player modes are all different ways that two participants are able to play a single player game together assisted the Symbiotic SNES. For example, the “Agree” mode only sends messages (button presses) to the SNES if both of the input controllers are pressing the same button at the same time.  The “Both Control” mode grants both input controller’s full agency over the SNES by summing the input from the two controllers into one stream of information sent to the SNES. “Teamwork” functions by only accepting one button press from each player at a time: if you want to run and jump one input controller must be pressing the run button while the other must press the jump button. There are also a few alternating modes that only give one player control at a time, but shifts the control back and forth between the two input controller according to the number of buttons pressed or a time period.      The second category of modes are the multiplayer modes which were designed to be used when playing a multiplayer competitive game. 4.5.2 “6 x 9 = 42” and the Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot – Interface DescriptionThe Chroma-Temporal Surveillance Bot (CTSB) is a simple interface that only consists of a single button and a 12 position rotary switch. The two components are housed in a xxx metal box, typically used for guitar effects pedals. The box is connected to an iMac which runs a Processing program. The program performs various types of slit-scan inspired video effects processing on the frames picked up from the computers webcam. The rotary switch changes the type of processing that is being performed. Examples include color-separated Perlin noise masks, xxxx, xxx, and xxx. When the button is pressed the program will reconstruct the mask, resulting in a variation of the type of processing being performed. 4.5.3 CTSB – Interaction DesignCTSB was designed with the principles of creating a friendly, easy to use device that appears like it is doing one thing while in reality its real ajenda is hidden. While the interface is straightforward and designed to be simple to understand and operate, the software serves a more sinister purpose. 10% of the time when the button is pressed the program will save the current frame, perform a Chroma analysis and based on the results assign a political orientation to the interactee. The program then proceeds to tweet the image along with a proclamation of political orientation. 	None of this activity is explicitly told to the user, who only experiences a temporally dropped framerate. In fact, the user will have to use their computer or smart device to go to https://www.twitter.com/CTSB3 to get any idea of the ajenda of the program. 4.6 Removing AgencyThis section discusses different examples of limiting the number of choices the participant has both when navigating the gallery space and interacting with the installations technology.4.6.1 Eavesdropper – Interface DescriptionFigure 24: Eavesdropper from outside4.6.2 Eavesdropper - Interaction Design      Electrical Box afforded no control over the technology present in the gallery to the viewer. All interaction is restricted to putting on headphones and exploring the room with the Eavesdropper listening devices. The Eavesdropper were designed to be magical black boxes10: artifacts that obscured  its internal circuity from the participant. In addition to avoiding the possibility that a gallery viewer would misread the interaction element of the installation as the fiddling with dials and knobs on the EavesDroppers the absence of any user control removes any calibration process, operational learning curve, or control mishaps that might occur. (TODO: figure out something to cite about not giving too much control to people to in the gallery).      The absence of user control over the EavesDroppers also helps guide participants to pick up the devices and walk around the gallery (step five in the rail). The lack of an interface had the added benefit of removing any frustration related to learning/adjusting a set of parameters, while also greatly reducing the number of things that can be broken or damaged. Ideally, the EavesDropper functions as an extension of the body; a task easier to achieve with a simple, intuitive interface.      As soon as someone is given a degree of control over an object, a relational shift occurs. Once the person is granted agency over the object, a dominant relationship emerges. The object become subservient to the user: the object is controlled by its user. This destroys the sensation of wonder; we now control the device, have power over it and it is no longer as magical, operating beyond our control and understanding. To avoid giving the interactee any mechanism for controlling the EavesDropper circuitry, the devices have a fixed.The EavesDropper design priorities were cost effectiveness, simplicity, and reliability. Each system consists of a small metal tin with a pair of Telex headphones plugged into the side. Inside each of the tins, there is a single-coil guitar pickup, a stereo amplifier, a ¼” headphone jack, and a lithium ion battery.       The amplifiers I used are small 1.85 x 2.11 cm breakout boards that house PAM8403 ICs11. The breakout boards simply provided a few caps and resistors for power conditioning as well as some pads that created a through-hole interface to the PAM84403: which is a surface mount component. Though inexpensive, the PAM8403 suited the project nicely. It has a filter-less architecture allowing it to drive a speaker load directly; without the need of any additional gain stages, filtering, or components. They are relatively efficient as a Class-D amplifier and consume less power than comparable Class AB or Class A amplifiers. They operate off of a supply voltage between 2.5 and 5.5 volts, allowing them to be powered directly with a Lithium-ion battery.(“PAM8403.pdf”)       The batteries are rechargeable 3.7V 4000mAh lithium ion batteries. To save space and money, I abstained from the use of battery cases in favor of soldering male JST12 RC battery plugs directly to the terminals of the batteries13. I wrapped the batteries and cables in electrical tape and coated the ends with liquid electrical tape. This insulated the batteries from the metallic case, saved space while providing an interface for hot-swapping the batteries.       In the WaveCave control room, I kept three PowerBoost 500c’s to charge my batteries as they were depleted. The batteries charged in about two hours and on a full charge were able to power the EavesDroppers for a minimum of 46 hours at a time. The PowerBoost line of breakout boards from Adafruit have been my go-to power solution for embedded projects in need of 5V for a few years now. These handy little boards boost the usable voltage from a lithium-ion battery to 5v while also providing a way to charge the battery via a USB jack. The 500c model handles 500mA of current, while other boards in the line can handle larger loads.       4.7 Orchestrating CircuitryFigure 25: The Voltage SlammerThis approach to interface design seeks to create a singular interface that can control several different electrical systems that would otherwise have to be controlled separately.4.7.1 The Voltage Slammer - Interface DescriptionThe Voltage Slammer is not only a mechanism for controlling circuit bent electronics but it also a platform for assisting in the act of circuit bending itself. The Voltage Slammer is part of an ongoing exploration in controlling circuit bent toys and instruments with Arduino powered interfaces and allows for simultaneous control over up to sixteen circuit bent devices. The Voltage Slammer interface was shown within the context of the interactive installation Toys at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo where the interface controlled four Farmer Says, a robotic talking bear, and two keyboards. 4.7.2 The Voltage Slammer – Interaction DesignThe front and sides of the interface has built in ultra-sonic rangefinders granting the interface a rough since of spacial awareness. This proved especially beneficial when the interface was used in an installation setting. When the installation is idol, it will remain off for just under a minute before pulsing all its channels, basically calling out for interactees, it will continue repeating this cycle until someone approaches in which it will turn itself on. Thanks to its ultrasonic rangefinder the Voltage Slammer was aware of the presence of humans. When no-one was near the device the device entered into a resting state. It stopped sending continuous signals to its circuit bent minions and was mostly silent, allowing the toys to complete the cycles they might have been currently engaged in. The Voltage Slammer will then proceed to randomly pulse one of the devices every two minutes. This is an act to silicate attention from anyone in the gallery. Once the presence of a body is detected by the voltage slammer the device will enter into its active state; again sending messages out to its toys.	The result of the Voltage Slammers interaction with its circuit bent toys was in a state of constant flux: it was hard to predict what the actual results might be from one sitting to another. The system would behave differently if there were 5 devices connected or 10 devices as each new device that was added changed the electronic properties of the system. 4.7.3 OneToFour – Interface DescriptionOneToFour allows for the message from a single SNES remote control to be sent to up to four SNES consoles at the same time. 4.7.4 OneToFour - Interaction DesignOneToFour, the object, does not offer any form of user control. In fact, the interface is not really an interface as much as it is a means to an end. The interaction is result of the way we adapt to the situation. It is an interface because it forces us to interact with the game and the controller in a way that is different that if we had the device, it also allows us to control things that we would not be able to control otherwise. 4.8 ConclusionThis chapter presented six different approaches for the design of interfaces for human circuit interaction. Terminology was proposed to describe how each of these devices are interacted with in regards to direct human circuit interaction. Interfaces that have been built using the design approaches were presented as examples of how these design approaches can be adopted in real world interface design. Each of the interfaces were design with a specific interaction scenario in mind and were either custom designed for an installation or were created as an experiment in interaction. How users interact with the device and their electrical systems was discussed for each interface in terms of their design goals. 	Collectively, these interfaces and design approaches are explorations in our relationship with electrical systems. They strive to invite us to minimalize our distance from the electrical systems we prevalently use and to rethink our relationships, interactions, and co-existence with electrical systems.Chapter 5 Approaches to Human-Robot PerformanceThis chapter addresses four different approaches to creating Human-Robot performances. Humans Leading Intelligent Mechatronic Instrumentalists discusses performances that are human-lead but involve reactive, intelligent mechatronic performers as well. The next section, Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Humans discusses performances where the music was written for mechatronic instrumentalists to perform but for humans to listen to and enjoy. This is contrasted by the next section, Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves which covers performances that are written within the perceptual and/or aesthetic frame of the mechatronic instrumentalists themselves, with the human enjoyment secondary. This idea is compounded and distilled in the fourth section: Exclusive Robot-Centric Performances which explores performances that are disrupted by the presence of humans, that are intended only for mechatronic personalities.  PerformanceHuman Role – During PerformanceComposerMechatronic RoleCategory of PerformanceRobot WhispersBeatlesinstrumentRobot Improvisational JamInstrumentalistinstrumentMechatronic Instruments Played by HumansHedonism BotInstrumentalistMechatronic Instrumentalists performing with HumanHello HumansNoneInstrumentHeadless Mechatronic5.1 Mechatronic Instruments, Instrumentalists, Personalities, and Digital Co-Composers“A robotic musical instrument is a sound-making device that automatically creates music with the use of mechanical parts, such as motors, solenoids and gears.”(Kapur 1) ******** Add picture of relation between these entities *******************This section defines, compares, and contrasts mechatronic instruments, mechatronic instrumentalists, and mechatronic personalities.5.1.1 Mechatronic InstrumentsThe mechatronic instrument is the most basic of all the configurations. The Instrument is played, just as any other instrument might be played. It has notes written for it, and a program tells it what to play. The instruments are unaware of who is in the room, the reactions of their environment, the drifting tempo, or anything else about their environment and state of being: just like a guitar. The Machine Lab at CalArts is a perfect example of an ensemble of mechatronic instruments(Kapur, Darling, et al.). Mechatronic instruments can be played either in real time (think JP when he took the robots class and played the MalletOTron via his push controller), have compositions written for them (Ableton/DAW), or be controlled in other allorhythmia or generative ways.  5.1.2 Mechatronic InstrumentalistA mechatronic instrumentalist is a mechatronic instrument that is able to exercise some amount of agency over its performance parameters without direct human input. This definition includes mechatronic instruments with certain types of feedback systems that allow them to adjust their performance on the fly. 5.1.3 Mechatronic PersonalityA mechatronic entity that exhibits traits of intelligence, preference, and personality. Mechatronic personalities can also be a Mechatronic Instrument but does not have to be. 5.1.4 Digital Co-ComposersWhenever human composers relinquish playback control to a computational entity they are relying on a digital co-composer. This includes the use of random numbers, API’s or other web services, and many algorhythms. Digital Co-Composers are very common, especially in compositions that are written using a text based coding language. 5.2 Mechatronic Instruments played by HumansThis section presents the Robots Improvisation Jam as an example of a human-mechatronic performance that only utilizes mechatronic instruments.5.2.1 Robots Improvisational JamFigure 26: Composition for Robots 2014 final improvisational jam.This group improvisational music performance featured 8 student performers [TODO, who] each improvising with a variety of mechatronic instruments, digital synthesis engines, audio feedback, and traditional string instruments. The mechatronic instruments in the machine lab were all controlled by the performers using a variety of interfaces including grid controllers, laptops, and microphones. Throughout the course of the performance the rhythmic, harmonic, and melodic content is all dictated by the actions of the human performers and the instruments no not exhibit any agency over their own actions. 5.3 Mechatronic Instruments playing “Headless”This section presents three different compositions using mechatronic instruments that perform without the guidance of human performers. These compositions follow the “press play and sit down” presentation mentality of many electro-acoustic acts. 5.3.1 BeatlesBeatles is an eight-minute etude written for MalleOTon and Lydia that is performed in a concert setting. The piece randomly triggers each of the actuators on the instruments alternatively at first until the second half of the composition where they are both actuated at once. Each of the note-on messages, however, are being sent at velocities that are below what is required to strike either the bars or strings. Throughout the course of the composition the velocities slowly increase and the interval between messages decreases. Even at its apex, no single message from the server contains a velocity that is strong enough to sound the instrument on its own. However, because the messages are sent to random notes,	Beatles is coded in the ChucK programming language. As the composition relies heavily of random number generators and the narrow gap where an actuator makes noise but does not strike its sound making mechanism each time the composition is actualized the performance will vary. Although the sonic result will vary with each performance, the result of this variance is the result of the digital co-composer and not the mechatronic instrument itself. Therefore, this composition still only utilizes Mechatronic Instruments.  5.3.2 Hello HumansHello Humans is a 5-minute-long composition written for xxx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx, xx and xxx. Hello Humans explores precise rhythmic modulations throughout the course of the installation and specialization throughout the Machine Lab and is performed in a concert setting.	The composition is through-composed in Ableton Live and will result in the same note messages each time it is run. Although the mechatronics will change their sound through the gradual process of detuning, rusting, are wearing the composition will never change, and will be performed the same way each run.5.4 Humans Leading Intelligent MechatronicsRobots Whispers and Hedonism Bot are two examples of musical performances that present reactive mechatronic systems which listen for input from human performers to determine their respective course of action. Robot Whispers14 had an ensemble of seven mechatronic instrumentalists react to the whisperings of a single human performer. Hedonism Bot15, alternatively, used a single mechatronic personality that reacted to the physical proximity of three human performers.5.4.1 Robot Whispers - Performance DescriptionRobot Whispers was composed in collaboration with Eric Heep16 and Danny Clarke17. Throughout the course of the performance a text score is algorithmically generated by a program in real time. The score contains information about the word that should be spoken and the tone in which it should be uttered. Eric and Danny followed the text score and quietly spoke the words into personal microphones that were processed with reverb and delay before being amplified and sent through quad sound into the performance space. The microphones have a STFT performed on the input spectrum in real time. The system split the spectrum up into three bands each representing the high, mid, and low frequencies. My job throughout the course of the performance is to use a Mini-Korg controller to control a threshold for each of the three frequency bins. If the overall amplitude of the band is higher than the threshold that I set, the robots will chime in and play with us: attempting to echo our language. Three groups are made with the robots in the Machine Lab dividing up their various actuator into a high, medium and low group. Each of the three actuator groups are mapped to the FFT groups so that each FFT group corresponds to its equivalent actuator group.5.4.2 Hello HumansComposition for Robots 2016 final piece. 5.4.3 Hedonism Bot – Performance DescriptionThis is the performance where we feed the bot.Talk about the dangers of the performance space and how it forced us to “wizard of Oz” the live performance. The following citation covers the Wizard of Oz effect.(Jay David Bolter and Diane Gromala 43–44)5.5 Mechatronic Instrumentalists Performing for Themselves This section discussed Computer Music and No Humans Allowed as examples of Mechatronic performances conducted for the enjoyment of robot performers. Computer Music is reintroduced within the context of musical performance. presented as an installation is actually a performance. The composition is a long scale phase piece that is more composed to be interesting for the performers than the viewers. 	Just because these pieces are conceived as for the enjoyment of the robots, does not exclude humans from observing the performance and formulating their own appreciation. What makes these works for the bot is the fact that humans are either not intended and are unable to experience the unaltered composition (in the case of NHA) or, in the case of Computer Music, the composition is written on a scale that is not aligned with a human’s temporal orientation. 5.5.1 Computer Music – As a PerformanceWhen Computer Music was shown at the Digital Arts Expo it was installed and active between 12:00PM and 8:00PM. Throughout the day the ensemble performed a single composition that could only have been performed with the precision of mechatronic instrumentalists. 5.5.2 Antisocial – As a PerformanceSocial interaction is a performance.Therefore, anti-social was a performance instead of an installation or piece of interactive sculpture.5.6 Mechatronic CommunitiesThis section presents No Humans Allowed as an installation that creates a community of mechatronic personalities, each with their own rules of (hostile) interaction.5.6.1 No Humans Allowed5.7 ConclusionThis chapter has presented five different approaches to human-mechatronic performance in terms of mechatronic agency and reactiveness. Additionally, the terms Mechatronic Instrument, Mechatronic Instrumentalist, Mechatronic Personality, and digital co-composer were defined. Several installations and performances were presented as examples of the roles each of these entities can play in mechatronic installation and performance.      Examining human-mechatronic performances in terms of agency and role affords unique opportunities to analyze performance opportunities when it comes to these events. Mechatronics systems by definitions. Chapter 6 Conclusion6.1 SummaryRestating the problem and summary of thesis scope.We are surrounded by such technological wonders that are capable of such wondrous things that we are forced to often interact with electronics within the context of layers upon layers of abstractions. The work discussed in this thesis seeks to re-open the discussion of how we interact with electrical systems on the most fundamental way. How our bodies electrical properties coexist and affect the electromagnetic devices that we co-exist with in our modern era. By bringing light to our mutual effects on each other my work hopes to bring about a sense of electromagnetic empathy.[NV5]6.2 Primary ContributionsThis thesis presented a wide variety of interfaces, installations, and performances which approach human circuit interaction as a focal source of inspiration. Each example was analyzed in terms of its human-circuit interaction modality and how it explored our relationship with technology interfaces.6.3 Final ThoughtsYour big ideas and final conclusions.We try to make the robot act like a human, but it is creepy. ** give example of the toaster guy””” imagine how impossible the iPhone guy, or the TV guy would be.Creating art that demands unconventional interaction modalities must reinvent the gallery space.In the coming centuries it will be a challenge for us to come to terms with the implications of our technologies. To avoid a terminator situation, it is important to start creating culture and art with robotic entities. LOLChapter 7 Appendix The appendix goes into technical depth about the systems used in the authors installations, interfaces, and projects mentioned in this thesis.7.1 Pantheon Mechatronic SystemPantheon is a mechatronic art system that is an adaptation of the MTIID servers and hardware that controls the mechatronic instruments residing in the Machine Lab at CalArts. The system is structured to be modular, flexible, and easy to learn and provides the technological core of my mechatronic installations. This section provides an overview of the software and hardware systems that make up the Pantheon Mechatronic System.7.1.1 ServerThe Pantheon server is written in ChucK and utilizes a variety of shielded Arduino Uno and Mega clients. Upon initialization the server uses a handshake routine to determine the client configuration. If sensor Arduinos are found the server will start a separate process that listens to sensors found on the network. If actuator Arduinos are found the server will determine the hierarchy between all of the clients. If groups of Arduinos are found together they will be linked under a single OSC address in addition to their individual addresses.  Once the server is running, a supplementary pythons script can be run to convert MIDI messages found on an internal IAC bus into the OSC messages that The Pantheon understands. This allows for the actuators to be controlled by any programming language, or program that is able to output either MIDI or OSC messages.7.1.1.1 SensorsTo handle the reading of sensors, such as with the Theia boards when SR-04 ultrasonic rangefinders are used the following approach is used. When the server is initialized a shred is sporked that consists of an infinite loop that polls each of the Theia's for their sensor readings.A separate shred is sporked during initialization that listens for responses from Theia, if any are heard it updates the Orchestrator which manages the actions of each of the actuator shields.7.1.1.2 ConductorThe conductor orchestrates all of the actuator shields and keeps track of the moods of each of the personalities.7.1.1.3 HandshakeEach of the Pantheon bots utilize the same handshake routine. TODO: add snippets of codeThe server sends a handshake message to each of the Arduinos attached to the host. The Arduinos recognize the message as a handshake message and respond with three bytes. The first is the Personality Number that the shield belongs to, the second is the type of shield it is and the third is the number of that kind of shield it is.7.1.1.4 OSCThe server uses OSC messages to orchestrate control between different clients and servers.The OSC messages are: /xyz/n/v x= The Personality Numbery = the board type (1: Brigid, 2: Homados, 3: Hermes, 4: Theia)z= board number of that type within the personalityn= note (0-63)v= velocity (0-1023)7.1.2 ShieldsThere are many different shield that have been designed for use with the Pantheon system. While the functionality of each board differs, they all share a grouping of common traits:• All connectors used are Molex Mini-Fit Jr. which can handle up to 9.0Amps, feature fully isolated terminals, locking housings, low engagement forces, and polarized housings.• All boards are designed to be shields for either the Arduino Uno or Arduino Mega.• The ‘tops’ of all the connectors are always ground.• All boards have a RGB LED that is red while booting, yellow until it completes its handshake, and blue while receiving a message.7.1.2.1 BrigidFigure 27: Brigid Actuator Shield.Brigid is the smallest of the two general purpose actuator boards. Brigid has a RGB status LED, six channels of control of solenoids, DC motors, LED strips or similar devices, and an input jack for an external power source. The board also includes a JST connector for I2C sensors. Each of the channels utilize a PWM pin on the Arduino instead of a simple digital pin for added flexibility.Figure 28: Single Actuator ChannelThe control channels consist of a N-Channel Enhancement Mode Field Effect Transistor whose gate is connected to one of the Arduino Uno’s PWM pins through a 1k resistor. The transistors drain is connected to the output of the jack with a 1N4004 diode to protect the transistor from any fly back current: common when using solenoids. Both the Brigid and Homados Controller boards use this same circuit for each of their channels.7.1.2.2 HomadosFigure 29: Homados Actuator ShieldHomados is the larger of the two actuator controller shields in the Pantheon system and is designed as an Arduino Mega cape. The board supports sixteen channels of actuator control, three JST I2C jacks, and a RGB led. The first fifteen channels of the Homados driver utilizes PWM on the Arduino Mega while the sixteenth channel uses a standard digital pin.7.1.2.3 HermesFigure 30: Hermes Stepper DriverHermes is an Arduino Uno shield designed to control the majority of stepper motors. The Hermes shield provides an interface for two XXXx Darlington Arrays that each contain 8 Darlington pairs. The shield affords control over up to four stepper motors that are either xxx or xxx. 7.1.2.4 TheiaFigure 31: Theia 1.0 - General purpose sensor board.Theia is a general purpose sensor board that was designed to allow for the easy use of eight SR-04 ultrasonic rangefinders.7.2 Embracing the Mechatronics – Compositional ConsiderationsOne of the easiest traps to fall into when composing for mechatronic instruments is to write in the same manner as you would for a human player. -less limitations (sometimes, number of notes played at once, speed)-noisy (sounds of actuators)-lack of expression in traditional senseAll of this boils down to a need to embrace the mechatronic instrument as more than just a robotic version of the instrument that it is; instead it is about looking at the instrument as something entirely new. And not just as a new instrument or an augmented version of the old instrument. Yes, you want to do this, but you also want to view it as a personality. This is very important, in many ways.- You interact with a personality, it responds to you, there is more dialogue that with an instrument which is expected to produce the same result 7.3 Project BackgroundsThis section elaborates on the motivation behind select projects mentioned in this thesis.7.3.1 Retrono – Virtue of Experimentation      Sometimes art falls on your lap and it is your job tell people about it. That was the case with Cathode Ray Tubes. I was looking for inexpensive alternatives to the NES18 to experiment with circuit bending. I was in the middle of developing my Modular SNES and was looking to expand my efforts to consoles besides the SEGA Genesis and the SNES19. I ordered a Retron video game console that was basically a cheap Chinese knock-off of the original NES. The simple device ran off of two chips a XXxxxxxx and a xxxxxxxxx. At first when I opened the case and examined the circuitry I was disappointed at how sparse the PCB was. When circuit bending devices you want lots of through-hole components and large IC’s with lots of pins. Most everything on the board was surface mount and I was unable to get too many interesting bends on my first pass. I, for some reason, decided to experiment and removed the gaming cartridge from the device and booted it up. I was amazed that it displayed a beautiful 8bit quasi-random image. The entire console, additionally, became hyper sensitive to EM interference. If you touched the board it would begin to oscillate and create some very interesting patterns. 7.4 Technical NotesThis section discuses technical specifics related to the hardware and software design of the installations and projects introduced in this thesis.7.4.1 The Retrons – How they WorkThe Retrons are literally turned inside out (the circuit boards are exposed while the buttons, controller jacks and cartridge ports are removed) and repackaged in custom enclosures. With their circuitry unveiled, and with no software to guide their computational logic, the Retrons becomes very susceptible to electro-magnetic interference. The Retrons are effectively transformed into 8-bit a/v synthesizers that generate their output based on the electrical noise present in the circuit. Four modified Retrons are placed in close proximity to CRT TV’s within the installation space. This allows the static electricity produced by the TV’s to interact with the Retrons circuitry, modulating their audio and video outputs. The Retrons are connected in such a way that the video output of each Retron reverberates through all other units in one large feedback loop.  Audio is generated for the space by the Retrons in the same manner as the video. This combined configuration creates a resting state for the installation that is in constant flux as all the Retrons and TV’s are feeding off of each other’s electrical fields. As the entire system has been designed emphasizing instability and assailability, the human body becomes an effective controller (due to its inherent electrical properties). Acts such as waving a hand in front of a TV, waving a hand above a Retron, touching a TV, touching a Retron, moving a Retron’s angle or distance from a TV and combinations of the above (touching a Retron and placing your hand a few inches away from a TV) will produce different effects that resonate throughout the feedback loop. If multiple people are in the gallery space, the installation scales nicely as the number and complexity of the effects produce even more drastic results in the Retron feedback loop.7.4.2 Electrical Box - EavesDroppers      Figure 32: EavesDroppers Circuit DiagramFigure 33: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronicsThe EavesDropper system is the technological heart of EB. The devices leverage the properties of EM inductance to sense changes in a magnetic field that the device emits. Changes in its own field resulting from external sources creates a voltage difference in the device causing a small current to flow. This signal is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones where it is transduced into acoustic energy in the form of sound. (TODO, EXPAND EXPLINATION OF WHAT IS ACTUALLY GOING ON WITH THE TECH). 7.4.3 Modular SNES – Technical DetailsFigure 34: Modular SNES, first of three designs.Internally, most all of the electrical signals that dictate the operations of the SNES console operates on a 5v logic level(“Snes_schematic_color.pdf”).      The Modular SNES, however, does not only provide a path to ground for these bends but instead opens them up to the world by porting the connections to the outside via 1/8th inch ports. The Modular SNES also has an Arduino Nano hidden inside with four input jacks, four analogue pots as well as its own 8 outputs. All of the inputs and outputs also have their own 1/8th inch jacks. The Modular synth allows for all of its 14 or 17 bends (depending on model) to either control the output of the Arduino or be bent by the Arduino or each other.7.4.4 Discovery Synth – Technical DetailsThe Raspberry Pi 2 features xxx General Purpose In/Out (GPIO) pins that can be used as either inputs or outputs at a logic level of 3.3V.(“Raspberry Pi GPIO Pin Information”) The Discovery Synth Cape20 allowed for buttons, sensors, and the ability to read analog inputs and is intended to be a generic shield for anyone who wants to pretend that their raspberry pi is an Arduino. Two MCP3008 8-channel 10-bit A/D converters are used to read 16 voltage dividers. 12 buttons, two LEDs and pinouts for a LCD monitor are included on the cape as well. [NV6]	The ensemble used Pure Data to read in the input states of the buttons and pots/sliders and provided the synthesis engine as well. Everyone in the ensemble was able to choose what specific components they used for the buttons and voltage dividers.  Although I used conventional potentiometers for 8 of my voltage dividers I took unconventional approaches to the other 8 voltage dividers and 8 buttons. 7.4.5 Symbiotic SNES - Technical DetailsTwo SNES knock off controllers have their plugs cut off and wires stripped. The SNES controller uses five wires to communicate with the SNES console. The SNES powers the circuitry on the controller with the first two wires which are 5V and GND. The other three pins are for communication: Clock, Latch and Data. Thanks to the XXXXX Arduino library it is just a simple matter of (INSERT CODE) to read in incoming controller data. Once the Arduino knows which buttons are being pressed on the two input controllers it performs its logic before flipping digital pins that are connected to pads with wires soldered into them whose other ends are soldered to each of the button pads of a SNES controller. When the sensing side of the button pad reads 5v it sends an ‘ON’ messages to the SNES, instead of the controller receiving this voltage via the bridging of the two sides of the button, the Arduino mimics this be sending its own voltage to the pad.       As oppose to my other work with SNES consoles this project is completely portable. The Symbiotic SNES system will work on any production SNES ever made and is not tied to any hardware modifications to the console itself. As the SNES’s internal voltage level is most always 5v, the console lends itself nicely to interfacing with Arduino microcontrollers, in this project the Arduino is directly powered through its output connections to the SNES console.        The SNES controller’s buttons are purely binary, meaning they are either on or off with no alternative: this lends itself nicely to bitwise logic operations. In fact, that is how all of the first mods started out.  If the controller inputs from the two controllers have a bitwise AND performed on them the resulting interaction will be that no messages get sent through unless both controllers are pressing the same button at the same time: which is the “Agree” mode. Likewise, if a XOR is performed on the incoming controller data only buttons that are pressed on a single controller are sent through, but if both controller press the button they cancel each other out and no message is sent to the host.7.4.6 Voltage Slammer - Technical DetailsAll of the devices were bent using the interface. The interface utilized RCA connectors between the circuit bent devices and the interface. This was because of the inexpensive nature of these connectors and the fact that they had two points of connection, as oppose to say, a Banana Jack. RCA jacks have the added benefit of taking up little space on the inside of the unit. This is very important when circuit bending small electronic devices that often have very little extra space in their cases.      After the Toys installation was shown at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo I decided to redesign the interface to feature 16 rotary knobs with built in push buttons and RGB21 LEDs. I replaced the SPST22 toggle switches with large sleeker metal pushbuttons, also with LED’s inside. The current interface is powered by an Arduino Mega and can be either batter powered or powered via USB. It functions both as a controller for specially hacked toys or electronic devices or as a useful tool for hardware hacking and circuit probing/bending. It is designed specifically for working with low voltage DC circuits and can’t handle anything high voltage or high current. Its first eight output channels are PWM23 waves each with a pot controlling intensity (PW) and a switch to cut off the current flow entirely. The first eight outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation.      The next five outputs are very similar to the first eight with the noticeable exception that they have no feedback LEDs, no on/off switches and are arranged on the interface in a separate group. They are intended to be used to control motors in bent devices, or any other bend in which you desire a constant current and don’t want the output to be effected by the master delay pot. When Toys was presented at the Digital Arts Expo these outputs controlled the talking robotic bear. In the rear of the device all 13 outputs are accessible via RCA connectors, with the ring connected to a common ground and the internal pin the hot signal. In addition, there is one additional RCA connection in which both the ring and pin are connected to ground, to allow for easier probing and bending.7.5 Computer Music – Installation Notes      One thing that sets Computer Music apart from other approaches to mechatronic instruments is the fact that the original housings for the motors are maintained. Additionally, usually with mechatronic instruments the motors and actuators are used to trigger some sort of musical instrument be it a membrane or a string. Computer music literally amplifies the sounds of the motors themselves as the primary sonic material instead of the physical work done by the motor.       Luckily for me, there has been extensive work done in the field of making music from Floppies, HDD’s and CD-ROM drives and I really just had to find the information and implement it. The excellent Arduino library Moppy, written and developed by the programmer SammyIAm, provides an easy to use interface for playing MIDI notes on floppy drives.(“SammyIAm/Moppy: Musical Controller for an Arduino-Floppy Drive Set Up.”) I was able to create a new internal MIDI bus on my Mac and pipe MIDI messages from Ableton Live to Moppy which in turn controlled the Floppy Drives.      Floppy drives take a four pin power connector that consists of one 12V, one 5V and two GND wires. This is the same pin configuration that is used by the old-school Molex connectors that all HDD’s and CD-ROM drives utilized in the early 2000’s.(“Drive Power Connectors”) I grabbed an old computer power supply I had lying about and a perfboard and created three long rails for my two power connections and my ground to which I connected six floppy drives. I built custom connectors and jumpers to fool the floppies into thinking they are connected to a computer and the fun began. At this point I have determined, just like with the floppy drives, lots of mileage can be squeezed out of precise pickup placement on the drives. Here is the current state of my HDD control, pretty lame (this video uses pickups instead of piezo disks for amplification)7.6 Secondary ThemesThis is where I am putting things that I don’t want to totally delete at this point.7.6.1 Our effect on electrical systemsI am fascinated at looking at the detrimental effects we have on electrical systems and how usually our interaction with an electrical system ends up being a positive, time saving, convenience on our part but a major hassle for the electrical system. Not to mention the corrosive effects of the human bodies oils, and fluids. The installation Cathode Ray Tubes plays with visualizing the effects our physical bodies have on nearby electrical systems. [NV7]7.6.2 Interactive Art      Ernest Edmonds, Professor of Computation and Creative Media at the University of Technology in Sydney, noted “art becomes interactive when audience participation is an integral part of the artwork. In making interactive art, the artist goes beyond considerations of how the work will look or sound to an observer. The way that it interacts with the audience is also a crucial part of its essence.”[NV8]7.6.3 Electrical Box - Complication of Radio InteractionFigure 35: Transduction and Gain steps in signal flow for installationElectrical Box complicates the already complex array of technologies and techniques used to transmit and receive audio information over the radio spectrum as a way to bring light to the scale and omnipresence of radio communication technology.      The signal eventually heard by the interactee through their EavesDropper headphones went though many manifestations before existing in the visitor’s mind as electrical impulses. Let’s take the example of a Disk Jockey (DJ) introducing the next song in his radio set. The DJ thinks of what she is going to say, her thoughts are transmitted to muscles in her neck and mouth, which mechanically oscillate her vocal cords to produce acoustic compressions and rarefactions in the atmospheric pressure creating what is commonly referred to sound waves. These sound waves travel a few feet across the studio where they vibrate the diaphragm of a microphone. The microphone converts the diaphragm’s acoustic vibrations into analog electrical energy, meaning that the signal has a continuous voltage. The analog signal is then converted into a digital one consisting of 1’s and 0’s before being converted back into an analogue signal which is amplified by several orders of magnitude before being converted into a EM wave that is broadcast throughout the world. (TODO, satellites and actually research the signal flow dummy) The waves are decoded be a terrestrial radio, often hundreds of miles away, back into a relatively accurate approximation of the electronic data that left the broadcasting studio a fraction a second in the past. The signal is amplified and converted into sound waves by the radio’s speaker(s), which travel through the room until it comes into contact with someone’s eardrum. The eardrum is a thin membrane that vibrates in reaction to changes in the atmospheric pressure. Its vibrations are amplified mechanically by bones in our inner ear that, in turn, are attached to other membranes which are set into motion. These membranes cause liquid in the cochlea to move back and forth causing tiny hairs to become agitated. The agitated hairs send electrical signals to the auditory lobe of our brain which decodes the information into what we perceive as sound (“Understanding How the Ear Works”). EB complicates this already complex order of transmission, transduction and perception by adding another abstraction (magnetic inductance), into the signal chain.       In EB, the radios tune into and decode radio waves pulsating through the gallery into analog electric signals. The signals are amplified before being sent through the unbalanced instrument cables hanging in the gallery. The cables each have 16ohm resistors at their ends which bridge the positive and negative leads: this provides what I call a “specter load”. Spector load implies the resistors are placeholders for something more tangible: the absent speakers. The specter resistor allows the system to get electronic work done and is essential to creating a strong enough magnetic field to be sensed with the electromagnetic transducer residing in the EavesDroppers. Once the pickups inside of the EavesDroppers detect the field, they produce an electronic current which is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones worn by a gallery interactee. The EavesDroppers, in practice, function as a second receiver: they pull energy out of the air and decode the music hidden inside just like the radios do. The EavesDroppers, however, have a much shorter range and are limited to detecting changes in its magnetic field.
Bibliography“CABINET // Invisible Cities: An Interview with Christina Kubisch.” N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Sept. 2016.“Circuit_Bending_Build_Your_Own_Alien_Instruments.pdf.” Web. 25 Sept. 2016.“Domnitch_Gelfand_ArtAsRigorousPhenomenology.pdf.” : n. pag. Print.“Drive Power Connectors.” Web. 18 Feb. 2017.“Ghazala.” Web. 15 Feb. 2017.---. N.p., n.d. Web. 15 Feb. 2017.Hinkle-Turner, Elizabeth. Women Composers and Music Technology in the United States: Crossing the Line. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2006. Print.Jay David Bolter, and Diane Gromala. Windows and Mirrors: Interaction Design, Digital Art, and the Myth of Transparency. N.p., 2003. Print. Leonardo.Kapur, Ajay. “A History of Robotic Musical Instruments.” ICMC. Citeseer, 2005. Kapur, Ajay, Jim Murphy, et al. “MalletOTon and the Modulets: Modular and Extensible Musical Robots.” n. pag. Google Scholar. Web. 23 Dec. 2016.Kapur, Ajay, Michael Darling, et al. “The Machine Orchestra.” ICMC. N.p., 2010. Google Scholar. Web. 2 Mar. 2017.---. “A Pedagogical Paradigm for Musical Robotics.” NIME. N.p., 2010. 162–165. Google Scholar. Web. 2 Mar. 2017.“Leonardo Da Vinci | Italian Artist, Engineer, and Scientist | Britannica.com.” N.p., n.d. Web. 15 Feb. 2017.Motherboard. Reed Ghazala, the Father of Circuit Bending: Sound Builders. N.p. Film.Net, Media Art. “Media Art Net | Kubisch, Christina: Sound Flow Light Source – Forty Pillars and One Room.” text. N.p., 5 Oct. 2016. Web. 5 Oct. 2016.“PAM8403.pdf.” Web. 31 Oct. 2016.“Raspberry Pi GPIO Pin Information.” N.p., n.d. Web. 16 Nov. 2016.“Russolo-Feldman-Reynolds_CoxWarner-AudioCulture (2).pdf.” : n. pag. Print.“SammyIAm/Moppy: Musical Controller for an Arduino-Floppy Drive Set Up.” Web. 18 Feb. 2017.“Snes_schematic_color.pdf.” : n. pag. Print.“The War of the Currents: AC vs. DC Power.” Energy.gov. N.p., n.d. Web. 14 Nov. 2016.“Understanding How the Ear Works.” Hearing Link. N.p., n.d. Web. 12 Nov. 2016.“Zimoun.” N.p., n.d. Web. 18 Feb. 2017.1 He is editor-in-chief of the Leonardo Music Journal, and a Professor in the Department of Sound at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. 2 Electromagnetic3 Do It Yourself – The method of building, modifying or repairing things without the direct aid of experts or professionals4 Printed Circuit Boards5 In video game design a game is considered to be “on-rail” if the manner the player travels is pre-determined on a line, as if literally on rails. This originally was done to allow for the use of high production backgrounds and higher quality pre-rendered graphics. Over time this technical approach to game design has become a stylistic one that still persists today. Examples of games that are on-rail include the Star Fox, Time Crisis, and The House of the Dead series.6 Kanthal A-1 is a resistance heating wire commonly used for the heating element for electronic cigarettes. Kanthal is a ferritic iron-chromium-aluminum allow – FeCrAl alloy – and is characterized by high resistivity and good oxidation resistance.7 The circuit boards are exposed while the buttons, controller jacks and cartridge ports are removed.8 The SNES that were used for the installation were re-designed and manufactured in 1990. I found these models the easiest to work with.9 Read Only Memory10 A black box is a device or system that is viewed in terms of its transfer characteristics (inputs and outputs) without any knowledge of its internal workings.11 The PAM8403 is a 3 watt, Class-D, stereo amplifier that is common and inexpensive.12 Budget interconnection company that is cost effective alternative to Molex. Most commonly seen with battery jacks and plugs in hobbyist projects.13 I do not recommend anyone does this themselves.14 Performed fall 2015 with Eric Heep and Daniel Clarke in the CalArts Machine Lab.15 Performed fall 2016 with Kyle McCarthy, Ivy Liu, and Jake Turpin in the CalArts Machine Lab.16 CalArts 2016 – MFA MTIID Alum17 CalArts 2016 – MFA Composition Alum18 Nintendo Entertainment System was a popular 8-bit video game console that was in production from July 15th, 1983 (1985 in the States) until 2003 (1995 in the States).19 Super Nintendo Entertainment System was the 16-bit predecessor to the NES (also known as the Super Famicom outside of the Americas). The SNES was in production from 1991 (1990 in Japan) to 1999 (2003 in Japan).20 A Cape for a Raspberry Pi is similar to what a Shield is to the Arduino. It Is a small printed circuit board that is designed to be attached to the GPIO headers of the Raspberry Pi and provides some sort of additional functionality usually though the use of IC’s and/or discrete electrical components.21 Red, Green and Blue22 Single pole single throw : a switch that has two states and one channel23 Pulse Wave Modification : A high frequency digital signal that has a variable duty cycle allowing for a pseudo variable voltage.[NV1]To explore unvconventional interaction modalities between humans and circuity to foster discovery[NV2]Perhaps this entire section can be removed…[NV3]Should talk about EB as being neutral, CRT as being human centric, causing the circuitry dismay and discomfort.  NHA being circuit-centrt, with its hostal nature to outside human presence.[NV4]Yea this is crap…[NV5]So yea, this is all pretty much bad[NV6]Combine these two sentances[NV7]Cool, so what?[NV8]Cool, so what?--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------xiii