California Institute of the ArtsElectromagnetic Translucenceexplorations in facilitating experience through sound artbyNathan Villicaña-ShawA thesis submitted in partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Fine ArtsHerb Alpert School of MusicMusic Technology: Interaction, Intelligence & Design2017
Supervisory CommitteeDr. Ajay Kapur							MentorDr. Owen Vallis						Committee MemberDr. Spencer Salazar							Committee Member

AbstractIn the abstract, you must (1) present the problem investigated in the thesis, (2) discuss the materials and methods used, and (3) state the conclusions reached. Individual chapters should not have abstracts.	The TOCOur relationship with technology is omnipresentAs an installation artist how can I challenge our interactional modalities with tech in order to foster a greater appreciation for electricity and technology.      -set stage a little bit, why is this view needed/useful-      This paper utilizes a system centric framework to analyze technological interplay in the form of extra and inner device communication. Communication methods are explored as a topic of experimentation and a general philosophical approach to system manipulation and interplay is presented.       A three tier approach for working within the framework presented is discussed as a possible way to leveraging systematic interplay. Opening Preexisting Systems discusses the process of opening up closed “black box” systems to either observation or manipulation by other systems. Building Open Systems explores techniques for designing and building our own open systems. Lastly the possibilities afforded by working with open systems are explored in several case studies ranging from circuit bending, circuit design, programming and data visualization.      This paper utilizes a system centric framework to analyze technological interplay in the form of extra and inner device communication. Communication methods are explored as a topic of experimentation and a general philosophical approach to system manipulation and interplay is presented.       A three tier approach for working within the framework presented is discussed as a possible way to leveraging systematic interplay. Opening Preexisting Systems discusses the process of opening up closed “black box” systems to either observation or manipulation by other systems. Building Open Systems explores techniques for designing and building our own open systems. Lastly the possibilities afforded by working with open systems are explored in several case studies ranging from circuit bending, circuit design, programming and data visualization.
AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank… Family/Friends:KimParentsWolfgangDexterMasonJPMartinFaculty:OwenAjaySpencerTom Jennings – Sarah Roberts – Clay Chaplin –Others:Peter Blasser
ContentsAbstract	vAcknowledgments	ixContents	xiList of Figures	xvList of Tables	xviiChapter 1	Introduction	11.1	Human Circuit Interaction	21.2	Electricity in the Arts	21.3	Conventions of Electronic Interaction	21.4	Atypical interaction modalities	21.4.1	Steve Mann	21.5	An agenda of experience	21.6	Thesis Overview + Outline	3Chapter 2	Background	52.1	Christina Kubisch	62.2	Louis and Bebe Barron	82.2.1	Intentionally Unstable Circuitry	92.2.2	Music for Magnetic Tape	102.3	Nicola Tesla’s Coils	112.4	Circuit Benders and Hardware Hackers	122.4.1	Reed Ghalzala – Circuit Bending	122.4.2	Nicholas Collins – Hardware Hacking	142.4.3	Online Communities	152.5	Peter Blasser	152.5.1	Paper Circuits	162.5.2	Art and Craft	17Chapter 3	Electrical Box:  Guiding Human Circuit Interaction in the Gallery	193.1	Project Background	213.1.1	Christina Kubisch’s Electrical Walks	223.2	Approach to Development	233.3	Technical Composition	243.3.1	EavesDroppers	243.3.2	Radio Receivers	303.4	Guiding Interaction	313.4.1	First Exposure	323.4.2	Creating Space	333.4.3	Creating Electrical Space	353.4.4	Light	363.5	Secondary Concepts and Themes	403.5.1	Electromagnetism and Radioactivity	403.5.2	The Experience of Listening	403.5.3	Radio the Technology	403.5.4	Signal Flow	423.5.5	Relationship with Electricity	433.6	Reception and Future Work	443.7	Conclusion	44Chapter 4	Challenge Human-Circuit Interaction Modalities	454.1	Introduction	454.2	Discovery Synth	474.2.1	Technical Description	474.2.2	Approach to Interaction	484.3	Retrono Synthesizers	514.3.1	Technical Details	534.3.2	Approach to Interaction	534.4	Modular SNES	534.4.1	Technical Details	544.4.2	Approach to Interaction	544.5	Symbiotic SNES	554.5.1	Technical Details	564.5.2	Approach to Interaction	574.6	The Voltage Slammer : Arduino assisted circuit bending	574.6.1	Technical Details	584.6.2	Approach to Interaction	58Chapter 5	Building and Composing for Cybernetics	605.1	The Machine Lab @ CalArts	605.1.1	Repairing and Maintaining the existing bots	615.2	Developing Hardware for Mechatronic Art	615.2.1	Standardization	615.2.2	Designing Boards	625.2.3	Actuators	625.3	Mechatronic Projects	625.3.1	SnapperBots	625.3.2	Computer Music Ensemble	645.4	No Humans Allowed	665.4.1	Project Description	66Chapter 6	Conclusion	696.1	Summary	696.2	Primary Contributions	696.3	Other Discussions	696.3.1	Other discussion sub-point	696.4	Final Thoughts	696.5	Future Work	69Chapter 7	Appendex	71Bibliography	73
List of FiguresFigure 1: Plasma Globe "Toy"	5Figure 2: Bebe and Louis Barron in 1956	8Figure 3: Barron Circuit	9Figure 4: Tesla Coil	11Figure 5: Circuit Bending - Adding functionality and 'glitching'	13Figure 6: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.	14Figure 7: Peter Blasser paper circuit with paper dissolved.	15Figure 8: Old. Mr. Grassi designed by Peter Blasser and built by the author	16Figure 9: Half of the WaveCave rigging grid	21Figure 10: Map from Christina Kubisch’s Milano Electrical Walk in 2009	22Figure 11: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronics	24Figure 12: EavesDroppers Circuit Diagram	26Figure 13: Telex 520 Headphones used in Electrical Box	28Figure 14: Eavesdropper from outside	29Figure 15: EB Interaction Rail	31Figure 16: Signage for Electrical Box (TODO, combine with picture of door from far away)	33Figure 17: EB grid configuration.	34Figure 18: One of two Listening Stations	36Figure 19: One of the 16 LEDs used in Electrical Box	37Figure 20: Impromptu Overhead Spot Light	39Figure 21: Transduction and Gain steps in signal flow for installation	42Figure 22: Discovery Synth	47Figure 23: Approach to removing physical abstractions for Discovery Synth’s buttons and pots	48Figure 24: Resistive Materials research for the Discovery Synth sliders	49Figure 25: Second version of the Retrono Synthesizers	51Figure 26: First Revision of the Ultimate Co-Op Arduino Shield	55Figure 27: Machine Lab @ CalArts: home to the MTIID department and the Digital Arts Minor (TOD): more resent picture	60Figure 28: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts Expo	63Figure 29: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts Expo	64
List of TablesNo table of figures entries found.This is an automatic table of contents. To use it, apply heading styles (on the Home tab) to the text that goes in your table of contents, and then update this table.  If you want to type your own entries, use a manual table of contents (in the same menu as the automatic one).Chapter 1 
Chapter 1 IntroductionBackground of my aesthetics, what I like and a very brief artistic, musical and CS background.1.1        Human Circuit Interaction1.2 Electricity in the ArtsThere have been many artists that have worked with electricity. 1.3 Conventions of Electronic InteractionDirect interaction with electricity is generally not a good way to go about getting work done.  1.4 Atypical interaction modalities- Unconventional interfaces- Using the bodies properties1.4.1 Steve Mannhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Mann1.5 An agenda of experienceSome people create art because they have something to say. That they have had some experience that is unique, they have a perspective that is their own and that people should know about. Perhaps they learned about some atrocity in the past or future. They want to warn us of the dangers of the presence or absence or some kind of thought. A political agenda, or perhaps xxxx.	I have been very lucky in the hand that I was dealt in life. I was born healthy in a wealthy nation. I am a white male, my father has a well-paying job designing electronic IC’s and I am able to afford to have spent the last four years of my life studying in one of the most expensive art schools in the entire world. Yes, my grandparents were immigrants that journeyed to this country during times of war and are emotionally (And physically) scarred from their escape from their home country, but their story is theirs and not my own. I have a story, and it is a perspective that is unique (if not privileged) but it is not a story that inspires me to make art. My life (specifically, life in general is one of the most important motivators and facilitators of the art making process for me.) is not a topic for my art. I am not an activist; I am aware of too many bad terrible injustices in the world to pick just one to dedicate my time to. In a strange since, the selection of one single cause, to me, seems at the same time to be dismissing the thousands of other charities one could possibly subscribe to.	What drives me to make art is the process of creation and discovery that it can impart on people. The wonder, the mysticism, the spirituality of art. Both in its creation as well as in its consumption. I am inspired by technology, knowledge and by history.  	What I really want is to facilitate art as an experience. Both for myself while creating it as well as for the gallery viewer or performance interactee that comes to a showing of my work.1.6 Thesis Overview + Outline1.6.1.1 More on Style Use	 
Chapter 2 BackgroundFigure 1: Plasma Globe "Toy"This chapter will provide a brief background of artists, scientists and ideas that are essential to getting the most of the topics that are discussed in later chapters. - Explain specifics of why the following artists are mentioned2.1 Christina KubischThere is nothing I can think of about the work of the Berlin based artist Christina Kubisch (b. 1948) that does not appeal to me. It contains all of the elements that constitute fascinating and wondrous sound art. It creates an intimate experience that can be grand and shared by many people at the same time. It has technology at its core (somewhat mysterious technology at that) but it does not shove the technology into your face. At the same time the technology is necessary to tell the narrative and impart the experience it is attempting to enforce. A truly multidiscipline artist, Christina studied electronic music at the Milan Conservatory of music but was unsatisfied with how ‘conventional’ her classes were and what she was required to learn. She decided to enroll in the Technical University in Milan and began to take classes in electronics. As described in an interview for cabinet magazine Christina describes how she stumbled upon, what has become her magnum opus. “One day I bought a telephone amplifier, a little cube that you could put next to your telephone so that you could hear it without having the receiver in your hand. The cube was switched on, and when I came into the laboratory, it started to make really strange sounds in my handbag. I took it out and asked my professor what was going on. He explained to me that there were coils in this little cube, and that they picked up some of the machines in the room. It was like a flash in my mind. It was exactly at the time when I wanted to get away from performance and start producing installations.”She goes on to explain how her excitement over the technology commanded her installation configurations.“In my early installations, there were people wandering around with these little cubes in their hands, walking along thick electrical cables that had sounds running through them. I didn’t think about using the sounds of the outside world. I had no idea about electricity in general or that it could make interesting sounds. I just used the system of electromagnetic induction as a way of amplifying musical sounds.”After five years she started working with an Italian headphone manufacturing company and commissioned 20 custom headphones with her electromagnetic snooping technology installed inside of the ear thingies (TODO). She made several installations showcasing the custom headphones but eventually the set got destroyed/stolen and she shelved the project. Almost a decade later she found a sponsor that would her help to develop the technology and create a new/better system, in 1999 at the Potsdamer Platz in Berlin she used the new system in a large installation ”Forty Pillars and One Room” in a large parking garage. She wrapped lengths of cables covered in green phosphorescent paint around forty of the free standing pillars in the parking garage (TODO FINISH DESCRIBING). (Net)	What is interesting about Forty Pillars and One Room is her use of electricity and concrete to create a world of nature. The sounds she chose to pipe through the cables created a sonic landscape in direct juxtaposition to the electrical and industrial materials she used for construction.She began to incorporate electromagnetic induction in her sound installations in the late 1970’s as she began investigating EM fields and electronics. and finished developing a system for leveraging magnetic fields for acoustic transmission in 1980. But she did not study electronics or electrical systems in the university days. Instead she took night workshops [TODO: Add in the specific workshop] on electronics because she was drawn to it. She wanted to incorporate electronics into her work and sought out the knowledge she needed to then create the art that appealed to her. Invisible cities interview. (“CABINET // Invisible Cities: An Interview with Christina Kubisch”)Is your interest in these phenomena primarily aesthetic or is there a critical element, a desire to call attention to the environmental and psychological implications of this electromagnetic web in which we live?That’s a hard question because I’m somewhere between. I have always been critical toward the way that people deal with technology and have made many pieces about the relationships between nature and technology. But I never point a finger and say, “This is bad” or “This is good.” I’m more interested in having people recognize what’s around them by doing it themselves. I could tell everyone that I think it’s bad. But that wouldn’t be an experience. It would just be didactic.2.2 Louis and Bebe BarronFigure 2: Bebe and Louis Barron in 1956Bebe Barron and her husband Louis are undoubtedly important figures in the history of electro-acoustic music as well as film scoring. Yes, they are best known for their sound design and scoring for the film Forbidden Planet. I am more interested in, not the specifics of the sounds they achieved or their role in defining associations related to various electronic sounds in our cultural subconscious but instead the methods and approaches that they had while obtaining the sounds they used in their scores, sound designs and music. 2.2.1 Intentionally Unstable CircuitryFigure 3: Barron Circuit      Louis build circuits with the intention of them being unstable and figuratively and literally blowing up after a short period of time. They recorded the sounds that these circuits made, catalogued them and then appropriated them using the technology they had available to them. Innovation through experimentation, pushing the limits, breaking things, and putting them back together in a different form. They, in my mind, have the same spirit of electronic experimentation and interaction that I want my installations to invoke.	They read the book cybernetics and were inspired by electronics and circuit design. As amateur electronic tinkers and the proud owners of one of the very few electro-acoustic music studios the Barron’s operated in a different stratosphere than the other electro-acoustic music studios of the time. Xxxx, xxxx and xxxx were all housed in academic institutions while xxx, xxxx and xxx were supported by their relative countries governments. Likewise, there were communication networks between many of these studios. The Barron’s were, not really academics (I think) and I argue that that detachment allowed them the freedom to be innovative in manners that would have much more difficult for the other studios (especially the government funded institutions). 	In the beginning of their experiences with building sound making circuits they generally would start with a circuit that was ‘stable’ and oscillated in a somewhat predictable manner. After some time experimenting that began to realize that the most interesting sounds to them came right before these circuits were overloaded and exploded. They began to even design circuits with the intention of them being somewhat unpredictable and unstable with the intention of them exploding. This is one of the explanations of their style of music which usually consists of many smaller recordings being spliced together. Most of these sounds were figuratively the death of a circuit.	The spirit of “I sort of know what is going on, let me try this thing that might break everything” had lead me to stumble upon the happy accidents that become my installations. 2.2.2 Music for Magnetic TapeBy 1951 John Cage became interested in the work that Bebe and Louis were doing in their ‘home’ studio. (their initial work began in 1948 after their wedding with tape reversal and splicing. (Hinkle-Turner)2.3 Nicola Tesla’s CoilsFigure 4: Tesla CoilYou ask someone to close their eyes and to envision [TODO, do study on this] electricity, they most likely will think of lightning or of a Taser spark, perhaps if they are a biggest enough nerd they will think of a tesla coil.	Tesla coils do not really serve much of a practical purpose in the modern world. But it is safe to say that more tesla coils are being made today that any other time in history,       It shows us, visually and acoustically, the power that we as a race have over the laws of the universe, over nature.	The tesla coil is of interest to be because it was one of the first, and to this day perhaps the most effective, displays of electrical energy. [TODO research this] The Tesla coil showcased the awesome might and natural force of electrical energy. It was tangible, terrifying and grand.2.4 Circuit Benders and Hardware HackersThe circuit bending and hardware hacking communities are of interest to me primarily because of their approach to electronic devices as well as electricity itself. Circuit Bending and Hardware Hacking are both strange, anti-social, punk anarchistic pastimes. Circuit benders, especially, often are amateurs that don’t know much about electronics or electricity in general. Yes, they might have a Swiss cheese internet knowledge that is very specific to, let’s say, a see and say but that might not even know about Kirchhoff’s laws or how to go about simple node-based circuit analysis.	They learn enough to not hurt themselves (hopefully) and to have fun and they void the warranty of their electronic keyboard and kill an afternoon crafting a peculiar artifact that is likely to continue getting ignored and unloved and eventually thrown out. (perhaps this speaks too specifically to my own personal experience). But generally people who embark of the craft of circuit bending do so more for the process and the artifact that is the result than the practical use of the finished object. Yes, I have met some composers, produces and the like who are interested in circuit bent toys, but now with the advent of downloadable sample packs that you can use with any sampler found in Ableton, Logic, Cubase and other DAWS not nearly as many people commit to building the ‘instruments’ themselves.2.4.1 Reed Ghalzala – Circuit BendingMr. Ghalzala is often referred to as the ‘father’ of circuit bending, although I believe that perhaps a more befitting title is the first face of circuit bending. Nothing against Reed, but, to his own admittance his stumbled upon circuit bending in a manner that can only be described as naively coincidental. He experienced an event that thousands of people have experienced before but just so happened to be just the right kind of nerd to explore the reason why. He was an explorer in his own right (and I guess still is, he lives in the woods only returning back to civilization on a consistent basis to buy more batteries and food.)	He set the tone for the movement, he was no scientist, he did not do well in school and to be honest does not produce the most interesting circuit bent devices, he was a hippy, a rebel. The idea that it is okay to break something, the idea that you can start a project without knowing what you will end up doing or create is very appealing to be. The idea that you can start doing something that you don’t know anything about and can figure it out as you go is really empowering and my main take away from the circuit bending movement.  (Ghazala)Figure 5: Circuit Bending - Adding functionality and 'glitching'2.4.2 Nicholas Collins – Hardware HackingFigure 6: Original Hacking Manual .pdf cover and Handmade Electronic Music first edition cover, both written by Nicolas Collins.The fact that I only did one project out of Nicolas Collins book and never even finished is a testament to how it changed my life. It is what I tell student artists to go out and buy when they come to me for tutoring in electronics because I never finished it. I tried, several times, it’s just too good.	Let me explain. It was such an inspiration for me that whenever I browsed through it I Coming from the academic world Nicholas approached things somewhat differently than Reed. [TODO insert background on Nicholas Collins]. With his feet firmly set in the academic world Collins brings a certain integrity to the field of hardware hacking and circuit bending. 2.4.3 Online Communities2.5 Peter BlasserFigure 7: Peter Blasser paper circuit with paper dissolved.In a world dominated by rigid rules and equations it is refreshing to enter into Peters unique take on circuit design with his paper circuits and point to point soldering. His guide-traces curve and arch around the circuit creating a rats-nest of connections, and possible bridges. About a third of the components values are left to the discretion of the builder and you quickly run into Peters quirky terminology (harry caps, X resistors, etc.). Although it might seem crude and amateurish at the first glance, the instrument is really well designed. It boasts stereo output and an amazing range of possible acoustic manipulation via its inset speakers and resonate properties and, perhaps most importantly, plenty of character. The random components ensure that each birthing of the Old Mr. Grasser sounds different.2.5.1 Paper CircuitsFigure 8: Old. Mr. Grassi designed by Peter Blasser and built by the author      I had the pleasure of meeting Peter Blasser at a workshop I attended at CalArts in 2015. Talking to him about his approach to circuit design and building the Old Mr. Grassi synthesizer with him was very influential in my design and approach to the Discovery and Retrono Synthesizers I built later that year.	Clay Chaplin, the director of the Experimental Sound Practices department at CalArts invited me to the workshop along with about a dozen other students. We met in-between classes in and unofficial manner and going into the first day of the workshop I knew nothing of Peters work and really what I was getting myself into. I simply knew we were going to build some sort of a synthesizer.	Peters circuits were astable, unpredictable and were full of nothing but character. His electronic diagrams all hand drawn and also function as the breadboard, perfboard and circuit board. He uses his own set of symbols (harry caps) and often times specific values are not specified and instead a suggested range is given for a component. 	The ideas and approaches of Peter Blasser allowed me to apply circuit bending techniques and approaches to circuit intersection into premeditated projects. It allowed me to justify the bridging of those two worlds.2.5.2 Art and CraftIn the late sixties and early seventies there was a shift in the arts community. Suddenly craft was not considered art and there was a separation. Before this time, they were considered the same category. A well-crafted Stravinsky is art, [TODO insert famous sculpture] is well crafted. In fact, one of the artists that I respect most, and one of my instructors here at the California Institute of the Arts, Sarah Roberts, received her degree at the (XXXX) university of Arts and Crafts.-
Chapter 3 Electrical Box:  Guiding Human Circuit Interaction in the GalleryFigure: Electrical Box - WaveCave Gallery September 9th-19th 2016   Electrical Box first presents you with a silent room ordained with over 1000’ of instrument cables hanging from the rigging grid. Small, white LED’s1 flicker at the ends of the cables suspended in air. After your eyes adjust to the space, you notice several pairs of headphones hanging on the walls in the far corners of the gallery. You push cables out of your way as you walk through the  exhibit to a pair of headphones. Now at the far end of the gallery, you see that the headphones are plugged into the sides of round metal tins resting on clear glass corner shelves. You put on the headphones and pick up one of the attached metal tins but only hear faint static, so you decide to investigate one of the particularly bright LEDs in the middle of the space. Walking back into the hanging cables you hear music in your headphones. You stop and hold the metal tin up to one of the suspended cables and the music gets louder. You realize that the sound is being emitted from the cables themselves, empowered with your new knowledge you sonically explore the exhibit by holding the tin to different cables; tuning into different radio stations. After some time, you take your headphones off, place them back where you found them and walk back though the again silent space before leaving the gallery.      In this chapter, the project Electrical Box is presented and discussed at length. First, a brief background of Christina Kubisch’s work is presented (pg. 20). Second, an overview of the finished technology and the development process are discussed (pg. 23). Third, the project’s primary goal of exploring guided interaction in galleries is examined and the techniques used to accomplish this goal are discussed (pg. 30). Fourth, secondary concepts and themes for the project are presented (pg. 39). Lastly, an overview of the installation’s reception as well as future work on this project is discussed (pg. 42). 3.1 Project BackgroundFigure 9: Half of the WaveCave rigging gridIn the spring of 2016 I spent a good deal of time in the WaveCave gallery at CalArts2 while I was exhibiting the installation Cathode Ray Tubes. Knowing I would be showing other installation in the WaveCave in the future, so throughout the week that Cathode Ray Tubes was installed, I kept brainstorming possible future exhibits. For several years, I have been wanting to do an piece that is visually composed of a huge number of instrument cables hanging from the ceiling. The WaveCave has a grated ceiling grid allowing for some basic rigging (see figure 9). This is the first space I have worked in where it would be easy to hang a large number of cables. I did some sketching, but did not finish developing an installation; unable to determine an interaction modality or narrative to complete the idea. Several months later, Sarah Roberts introduced me to the work of Christina Kubisch, the German installation artist. I fell in love with Kubisch’s technology, attitude and approach to art creation: her works inspired me to make EB3 a reality. 3.1.1  Christina Kubisch’s Electrical WalksFigure 10: Map from Christina Kubisch’s Milano Electrical Walk in 2009Electrical Box is a spiritual and technological extension of Christina Kubisch’s electromagnetic installations as well as a direct extension of my own electromagnetic research art4. In 2004, Kubisch officially began exhibiting works under the umbrella name of Electrical Walks. Her Electrical Walks, although closely related to her previous installations, featured different source material. Instead of planting electromagnetic signals in wiring that people we tasked with listening to via her devices, she decided to allow the environment to create the fields for her. When researching for a new walk, she embarks into an (usually) urban center with a EM listening device. She walks around the city and maps the magnetic activity. After thoroughly exploring all of the surrounding areas, she constructs EM5 maps of the area. The maps show areas of sonic interest and suggest routes to tour the cities magnetic features. Copies are made and handed out to the public along with her custom build magnetic field listeners.      She uses the term Electrical Walk to describe the action of exploring a space’s EM properties by means of EM listening as well as the site specific installations of the same name. For her, the Electrical Walks are not only for other people to enjoy but are first for her, the artist. In fact, she has done electrical walks in different cities that have not been opened up to the public: they were only experienced by her.  3.2 Approach to DevelopmentOver my time as an artist, I have refined an approach for developing my installations. First I begin a research phase where the goal is to learn as much about the technology required for my project as possible. This begins with a few weeks digging deep into the topic; intellectually by reading about the technology as well as physically, by building prototypes and conducting experiments. I attempt to approach the mechanisms from the lowest level and work upwards. For instance, when learning how to design and manufacture printed circuit boards, I spent many months experimenting with etching my own copper clad utilizing various DIY6 and hobbyist approaches before I learned proper circuit design using EAGLE CAD and PCB7 fabrication houses. There was lots of failure, naturally, but even more lessons learned: I am a stronger layout engineer as a result of these experiments. When the ‘low level’ experimental prototypes fail and I am confident I understand the reasons why; I take a step back and see if there is anything I can do to simplify my technical approach. I repeat the process over and over again until I am confident I have explored all of the technical approaches: completing the research phase. Next I begin the actual development process.  Incorporating aesthetics, I start developing a production design that both functions as I intended and looks good.3.3 Technical CompositionThis section discusses all of the technology used in EB. First the EavesDropper magnetic field listening systems are discussed and lastly the radio receiver stations are explained.3.3.1 EavesDroppersFigure 11: EavesDropper EM listening device opened up to expose electronicsThe EavesDropper system is the technological heart of EB. The devices leverage the properties of EM inductance to sense changes in a magnetic field that the device emits. Changes in its own field resulting from external sources creates a voltage difference in the device causes a small current to flow. This signal is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones where it is transduced into acoustic energy in the form of sound. (TODO, EXPAND EXPLINATION OF WHAT IS ACTUALLY GOING ON WITH THE TECH). The EavesDroppers design priorities were cost effectiveness, simplicity and reliability. Thus, the final version of the EavesDropper magnetic field listening System is electronically quite simple. Each system consists of a small metal tin with a pair of Telex headphone plugged into the side. Inside each of the tins, there is a single-coil guitar pickup, a stereo amplifier, a ¼” headphone jack and a lithium ion battery.       The amplifiers I used are small 1.85 x 2.11 cm breakout boards that house PAM8403 IC’s. The PAM8403 is a 3W, Class-D, stereo amplifier that is very abundant and inexpensive (less than 0.25$ including the breakout board). The breakout boards simply provided a few caps and resistors for power conditioning as well as some pads that created a through-hole interface to the PAM84403 (which is a surface mount component). Though inexpensive, the PAM8403 suited the project nicely. It has a filter-less architecture allowing it to drive a speaker load directly; without the need of any additional gain stages, filtering or components. They are relatively efficient as a Class-D amplifier and consume less power than comparable Class AB or Class A amplifiers. They operate off of a supply voltage between 2.5 and 5.5 volts, allowing them to be powered directly with a Lithium-ion battery.(“PAM8403.pdf”)       The batteries are rechargeable 3.7V 4000mAh lithium ion batteries. To save space and money, I abstained from the use of battery cases in favor of (carefully) soldering the male JST8 RC battery plugs directly to the terminals of the batteries. I wrapped the batteries and cables in electrical tape and coated the ends with liquid electrical tape to insulate the batteries from the metallic case, saved space, and provide an interface for hot-swapping the batteries for charging and to interface with the PowerBoost 500c charging stations themselves. The Batteries charged in about two hours and on a full charge were able to power the EavesDroppers for a minimum of 46 hours at a time.      In the WaveCave side room, I kept three PowerBoost 500c’s to charge my batteries as they were depleted. The PowerBoost line of breakout boards from Adafruit have been my go-to power solution for embedded projects in need of 5V for a few years now. These handy little boards boost the usable voltage from a lithium-ion battery to 5v while also providing a way to charge the battery via a USB jack. The 500C model handles 500mA of current, while other boards in the line can handle larger loads. Figure 12: EavesDroppers Circuit Diagram3.3.1.1 Exploratory DesignsThe initial EavesDropper designs were not as streamlined as the final versions. When I began working on the project, I intentionally attempted to build and design as much of the circuity from scratch as possible. In the case of the guitar pickup, for instance, I experimented with different size inductor coils instead of the pickups. Likewise, I tested many amplification configurations, including op-amps, transistors, as well as various breakout boards and even guitar amplifiers. With each iteration the problem was approached from a different angle. After a few successful versions of the technology was built and I was able to develop an understanding of the concepts behind the circuity, I finally started drafting my production model. The early exploratory designs proved vitally important. They allowed be to better understand the underlying electronic mechanisms and helped to streamline the final design.3.3.1.2 EnclosureFor most installations I create, my first instinct is to design laser cut cases out of clear acrylic to house the circuitry. For EB, this approach would have violated the installations aesthetics. Radio technology and the era in which radio use was ubiquitous with family time and recreation, was a time of metal, fake wood grain: not the smooth, polished acrylic I am usually drawn to.  The flat metal tins used are appropriate, simple, and were timelessly generic: they would not have looked out of place in 1910, 1950, 1980 or today. 	Knowing that the devices would be heavily used in the coming weeks, I wanted to ensure the circuity remain intact and in a static position. To avoid stress breaks on the wires, I hot-glued all the solder points going to and from the headphone jack and amplifier breakout board. Additionally, I wrapped the amplifier board in electrical tape to prevent any shorting with other components and the metal case. The pickup was particularly troublesome as it has a large fixed bar magnet on the bottom. This magnet pulls the pickup away from the front of the case to the back of the unit. If allowed to happen, the effective listening distance of the EavesDropper dramatically decreases. Lastly, whenever the pickup moves by even the smallest amount it produces a huge amount of highly dissonant disturbing noise. An unfortunate byproduct of using metal cases is that “case noises” are amplified by the pickup in addition to the magnetic fields surrounding them. After some troubleshooting and experimentation multiple layers of foam poster tape was used to secure the pickup, as well as the battery, to the front of the EavesDropper units. This provided maximum listening distance, secured all of the heavy components, and allowed me to balance the weight distribution within the tin.3.3.1.3 HeadphonesFigure 13: Telex 520 Headphones used in Electrical BoxMy first instinct, as a studio engineer, was to get the highest quality headphones I could afford for the EavesDroppers. I looked at SONY, Sennheizer, AKG and other manufacturers of quality audiophile headphones. However, buying something new and manufactured in 2016 would violate the aesthetic and the artistic integrity of the installation. The installation is tring to present radio technology in a technological zeitgeist that is most representative of its rein in the 50’s. I settled on Telex 520-01 headphones; (TODO, more information about the headphones?)      The headphones ended up having the perfect cable lengths: at 59 inches, they were long enough to comfortably extend out your arms with the EavesDroppers without it tugging on your head but not so long that you were at risk of tripping on the cables while exploring the space. Their styling is a throwback to switchboard telephone operators and the associated technology, helping to set a timeframe for the installation. In alignment with their retro aesthetic they had a matching sound. They were a bit tinny, with a weak bass response and had little presence. Luckily, EB by design is a low fidelity system. Radio is famously lo-fi with very little information in the extreme ends of the audible sonic spectrum. Not only would hi-fi headphones be underutilized, they would also be detrimental to the experience; both tactilely and visually.3.3.1.4 No ControlFigure 14: Eavesdropper from outsideI had the option of adding various types of user control to the EavesDroppers. For instance, it would have been easy to incorporate a potentiometer or rotary knob into the design that gave the participant agency over the devices gain or pitch but I decided against creating any of those modalities. I wanted them to be magical black boxes9: I did not necessarily want people to know the technical mechanisms inside the shiny tin enclosures.       As soon as someone is given a degree of control over an object, a relational shift occurs: no longer do the two exhibit a neutral relationship. (TODO add annotation) Once the person is granted agency over the object, a dominant relationship emerges. The object become subservient to the user: the object is controlled by its user. This destroys the sensation of wonder; we now control the device, have power over it and it is no longer as magical, operating beyond our control and understanding. To avoid giving the interactee any mechanism for controlling the EavesDropper circuitry, I designed the devices to have a fixed gain set by a static resistor: the only way to turn them off is to unscrew the top, and unplug the battery.      The absence of user control over the EavesDroppers also helps guide participants to pick up the devices and walk around the gallery (step five in the rail). I feared that someone would misread the interaction element of the installation as the fiddling with dials and knobs on the EavesDroppers, instead of using the EavesDroppers for their intended purpose. The lack of an interface had the added benefit of removing any frustration related to learning/adjusting a set of parameters, while also greatly reducing the number of things that can be broken or damaged. Ideally, the EavesDropper functions as an extension of the body; a task easier to achieve with a simple, intuitive interface.3.3.2 Radio ReceiversBuilding radios from scratch was the first thing I worked on after the EavesDroppers were designed. I bought an assortment of AM and FM receiver breakout boards, namely the AR1010 and Si4703. I found it difficult to prototype using the tiny IC packages10 that the receivers were manufactured as and soon realized the complexity of designing a descent radio receiver. The research concluded that building custom radio receivers would be far too costly in time and dollars to justify for this project.       My research proved that I had no aesthetic, technical or financial advantages to building my own radio receivers. (TODO PERHAPS THIS SUCKS?) I had a few things to consider: price, portability, sustainability and accessibility. I needed at least 8 radios so they could not be too expensive. Also because of the number needed I did not find it feasible to go thrift store shopping for them. Ultimately, I settled on a cheap radio11 because it was about $12.00, is USB12 powered, tuned into both AM and FM bands, had a 1/8th inch output, was small and had good reviews. The fact that the radios were powered by USB allowed me to have less overhead in terms of power strips and cable mass. I was able to use a USB charging block13 to power all of the radios for the 10 days EB was active.       3.4 Guiding InteractionFigure 15: EB Interaction RailAll of my works are explorations in one or two concepts. The concepts can take the form of a specific technology, an emotional state, a chord progression, the use of a specific tool, etc. Electrical Box for me was primarily an exploration in guiding gallery interaction. Electrical Box, and its interaction goals are directly contrary to the typical role of the gallery goer. In the MOMA14 or in the LACMA15 there is a general understanding that one does not touch, breath on, or linger any of the pieces. After all, everything in the room must be preserved. It has all been meticulously angled, positioned and lighted according to the curator’s expert opinions.        Unlike my other installations that address guided interaction, EB exhibits a linear interaction schema. There is a singular interaction rail16 that I am attempting to guide viewers though. People can deviate from the rail, but if they are unable to skip a step and if they do not follow the rail to the end, they miss a significant aspect of the installation. Thus, when conceptualizing Electrical Box, considerable effort had to be made to construct situations that did not directly tell people what to do, but instead guided them down the rail. 3.4.1 First ExposureThere were three different ways that people were first exposed to Electrical Box. 1. Walk-in: They walked by the gallery space and noticed that the doors were covered with black construction paper and that there was a piece of paper hanging next to the doors.2. E-mail: They saw the blurb in the daily announcement that the Herb Albert School of Music emails to all students each morning at 9:003. Word of Mouth: They heard about the installation by word of mouth.I did not want the first exposure to the installation to be an explanation of the gallery space or any sort of hint to what the interaction actually was. Instead, both the email announcement as well as the sign read simply and was a single sentence long. The important points were: 1. Where is the installation?2. The installation is interactive.3. The installation involves electromagnetism.In the case of the sign outside of the gallery itself, there was no need to mention the location so it simply read “an interactive electro-magnetic installation by Nathan Villicaña-Shaw”. 3.4.1.1 SignageFigure 16: Signage for Electrical Box (TODO, combine with picture of door from far away)In many ways, I approached signage for Electrical Box as clues to a mystery. The installation ran under the radar so to speak. I only provided the announcements and signs as minimally required by CalArts convention and did little to advertise the installation. The simple sign outside of the gallery is shown above. If read, the visitor will only know that the name of the installation is Electrical Box, the name of the artist is Nathan Villicaña-Shaw, the installation is electromagnetic in nature and it is interactive.3.4.2 Creating SpaceThe installation had over 1000’ feet of cable, 16 LED’s, and four electromagnetic listening devices. However, the WaveCave is quite a large space17 and once all of the equipment was loaded into the gallery I knew I would be unable to completely saturate the space with cables as I had initially envisioned: I simply did not have enough cables. If I attempted to fill each square foot of the gallery with what I had, the space would have felt bare as there would have been a great deal of space in-between each cable run. I wanted the installation to have the experience of being completely surrounded by cables in almost a claustrophobic sense. My only option was to revision the installation as having negative space in addition to occupied space.        Figure 17: EB grid configuration.      Ironically, in order to fill the gallery, I needed to create and organize empty space. I went about accomplishing this in two manners. The first was to spatially frame the installation by leaving the entire outside rows and columns of the grid void of cables (see figure 16). This changed the installation quite significantly, as the entire exhibit was no longer occupied by cables, but instead, the cables were framed in the gallery by empty space physically surrounding them. The frame functioned as a walkway around the installation; you were able to walk around the cables and were no longer forced to navigate through them. While at first I was distressed about this change in the spacial dynamics, the framing of the space ended up helping guide people though the interaction rail by softening the transition into the gallery and by allowing intermediate commitment to the interaction.        While the border helped the installation feel fuller, it also reduced the area cables had to cover by 20%, from 90 to 72 drops. An obstacle in the rigging grid was the six florescent lights that were built into the ceiling. These subsections were completely consumed by lights housing  leaving no option to route the cable through these sections the same way as everywhere else (see figure xx). While it was possible to weave the cabling in and out of the grid in adjacent subsections, giving the appearance that the subsection was routed the same as the others, I ultimately decided on leaving the squares absent of the cables. As these spots were specifically picked by the rooms designers, or electricians, to provide even lighting throughout the room, each of the six lights were in the relative center of the room. When left void of cables, they provided perfect vantage points from within the installation making it easy to stand inside of the cabling without the cables actually touching you.3.4.3 Creating Electrical SpaceWhen you refuse to directly tell people what to do, you run the risk of them diverging from your intended experience (the rail) at any moment. For example, in EB, it is essential that once someone listens to their first cable that they listen to another cable and begin to explore the space (step 5 in figure 14). The signals that reside in each drop thus needed to be arranged in a pattern that ensures as much variety in adjacent drops as possible. If two or more cables next to each other are carrying the same signal it is possible someone will only listen to those cables and assume every cable ‘contains’ the same signal. Each cable consisted of between 2 and 4 loops as well as the terminating LED, for a total of between 3 and 5 drops from the grid. Each radios output was being sent through two cables. If two of the longer cables are connected to the same radio, the same signal could be sent through up to 10 loops/terminals. If all ten of these drop points were found next to one of the corners housing an EavesDropper station, a visitor would most likely listen to the first two or three cables, hear the same station, and conclude that all cables contain the same station: never completing the rail, getting stuck on step 4. Figure 18: One of two Listening Stations3.4.4 Light"A painter should begin every canvas with a wash of black, because all things in nature are dark except where exposed by the light."  -- Leonardo da Vinci“I will love the light for it shows me the way, yet I will endure the darkness for it shows me the stars.” -- Og MandinoFrom the beginning, I knew I wanted the installation space to be dimly lit, a blank canvas. There is a certain intimacy about the darkness. Like the flickering of the fireplace in the cave 10,000 years ago, there is something comforting about a dimly lit space: it allows us to let our guard down. Absolute, complete darkness, on the other hand, is unnerving in its own right. When I was a teenager my parents would take me spelunking18. When you are hundreds of feet underground the earth in a cave and you turn off your lights, the darkness is no longer a novelty: it resembles the feeling one gets while holding their breath underwater and thinking about downing. In EB light is approached as Mandino forshadows, as a tool to show people the way, to guide viewers along the rail.3.4.4.1 LEDsFigure 19: One of the 16 LEDs used in Electrical BoxThe LED’s that light the gallery function as level indicators for the output of eight radios hidden in the galleries rigging grid. Meant to be the primary visual draw, the LED’s were simple 5mm white through-hole LED’s bought in bulk. They were coated in plastic dip along with the ‘phantom-load’ resistor three times (allowed to dry in-between). I then carefully cut the plastic coating off of the lens of the LED’s leaving the leads, resistors and cable tips covered in the plastic coating. In application, the brightness of the LED’s did not exhibit much variety and the average luminance was the result of the reception quality for the particular station and the stations overall loudness (e.g. music is brighter than talking). What did vary was whether or not the LED was on or not. It takes a great deal of gain to drive an LED off of the signal that should be driving a speaker.	Seven LEDs were concentrated in the rear of the installation space: each grid segment in the back row had its own LED. This row of LED’s were vertically arranged in a V formation so that the light in the center of the room was closest to the floor while the LED’s on the ends were closest to the ceiling. The remaining nine LED’s were distributed in an even manner in the front 7 rows, leaving a single row buffer between the formation in the rear and the random scattering in the foreground. This created a focal point in the rear of the room that encouraged folks to enter into the space: it gave importance to the rear of the room. As the EavesDroppers were in the back of the room and were an essential component to interacting with the space, I wanted to immediately draw their attention to that area. Although they looked beautiful and provided visual ambiance for the piece, the primary function of the LEDs is to be guides to the visitors: they helped folks stay on the rail. 3.4.4.2 Door LightThere were two forms of light originating from the WaveCave doors that proved impactful to the installation: frame leakage and open door. Frame leaking, from in-between, under and above the entrance doors, was unfortunately unavoidable due to the construction of the doors themselves. Each of the two French doors are single pieces of ¼” glass; with at least a ¼” gap on all four sides to ensure that they do not come into contact with any other surface: I could stick a pinky finger between the two doors. (see figure xxxx) I covered the doors with black construction paper to prevent the outside light from shining through, but was unable to prevent the leakage that framed the doors themselves. With no real way to completely eliminate the boarder leakage, I looked for ways I could leverage it; I decided to add ‘peep’ holes on the doors. While there was light coming from above, below, and in-between the two glass doors luckily the WaveCave doors are inside of a small alcove that prevented the bright natural outside light from shining inside as well as the majority of the direct beams from the overhead lights. All of the light that was able to seep into the gallery was in the form of indirect reflections and not direct beams from light sources.	The second source of door light was far more dramatic and impactful to the user experience. When the doors themselves opened they flooded the gallery space with a great deal of lighting. The large glass doors also take a very long time to close. (TODO: measure how long. All of this was very beneficial to the individual that enters into the gallery space but ended up being quite disruptive to gallery viewers already interacting with the space. 3.4.4.3 Overhead LampsFigure 20: Impromptu Overhead Spot LightAfter I finished setting up the installation I soon realized that the EavesDroppers were obscured by darkness and the hundreds of feet of instrument cables in the room. They were not readily apparent and ran the risk of not being noticed. After your eyes adjusted to the dim lighting of the space you are naturally drawn to the flickering LEDs and the hanging cables. There were adjustable spotlights in the gallery, but they immediately dominated the space when turned on as they were far too bright. I improvised with two clip on lamps I had lying around along with some low wattage energy saving bulbs. I created 8” tubes out of the black construction paper that I used to block out the door and some gaff tape to make my own dim spotlights. After some meticulous positioning in the grid, I was able to get my makeshift spotlights shinning down on the corners providing just the right amount of illumination after adjusting the length of the tube.3.5 Secondary Concepts and ThemesWhile EB was primarily an exploration in complicating interaction modalities between humans and electrical systems, EB touched on the secondary themes of electromagnetic theory, eavesdropping, voyeurism, and radio technology. 3.5.1 Electromagnetism and Radioactivity      EB calls attention to the transmission and reception of audio data through different mediums. Electronic Box explores the radioactive nature of the modern world by shining light on the fact that we are constantly surrounded by radioactive and electrical energy that we are not aware of. It empowers us to eavesdrop in on these electrical activities and contemplate our isolation from the vast majority of energy surrounding us. There has been extensive research investigating possible harmful side effects the omnipresent effects of electromagnetic energy might have on the human body and psyche, but little immediate danger has been found. [site WHO article of EM radiation]. None the less, EB cant help but to provoke use to think of the implications of living in a sea of EM radiation.3.5.2 The Experience of ListeningListening is inherently a personal experience. No two people hear in the same way. If you go to a concert, for instance, the position you sit in the hall will already grant you a unique acoustic window that no one else in the space has. Additionally, your own unique biology (hearing loss, neurons, synesthesia, etc.) colors the sonic experience to one that is unique to you. Radio, historically, minimalized this effect: it is head simultaneously across wide regions by thousands of people at (on a human perception timeline) the same time.      Radio, has an inherent exclusivity to it as well, at any given time that you are ‘tuned into’ a radio station, by definition, you are at the same time ‘tuned out’ of far more stations. This becomes an even stranger thing to ponder, when you consider the fact that this remains true when you don’t even have a radio, the only difference is that you are ignoring all stations.3.5.3 Radio the Technology(TODO, more research on radio technology)Radio is quite a peculiar technology. Its broadcasters constantly saturate the earth and, in fact, the entire solar system, with electromagnetic waves. These waves of energy are constantly flowing through our bodies at the speed of light. There has been a good deal of research investigating the possibly harmful effects of radio-waves in the past 60 years but there has never been a strong correlation made between radio waves and health for the average person exposed to the standard level of radiation. INSET FINDINGS about how it is not really dangerous but still the implementation of the technology somehow feels dirty.       When I first began research for this project, I was under the impression that radio was antiquated, nearing its eventual death and resignation to internet and TV. And while it is safe to say that the glory days of radio are past the Radio industry in 2016 is still kicking. The average American still spends a large part of their lives listening to radio in one form or another. Terrestrial listening on the AM and FM bands is a part of 91% of Americans weekly routine, mostly in the car to music stations. This is changing as many stations are moving to digital formats such as podcasts, digital radio and other technologies as they are integrated into the technological mainstream. I anticipate that with more cars being built with their own multimedia capabilities, the penetrations numbers of terrestrial radio will increasingly decline, with specialty niche stations especially vulnerable. Even now, the variety of radio stations available has been decreasing with fewer stations of the airwaves. According to a research study conducted by Edison Research, while, monthly online radio listenership has more than doubled by 2010. As an industry online add revenue have been steadily increasing over last few years while spot advertising, the traditional source of income for radio stations has been declining by about 3% each year (Vogt). All of this being said, the decline of radio is actually slowing. (TODO add info about that)	TODO, so what?3.5.4 	Signal FlowFigure 21: Transduction and Gain steps in signal flow for installationThe signal eventually heard by the interactee through their EavesDropper headphones went though many manifestations before existing in the visitors mind as electrical impulses. Lets take the example of a DJ introducing the next song in his radio set. The DJ thinks of what she is going to say, her thoughts are transmitted to muscles in her neck and mouth, which mechanically oscillate her vocal cords to produce acoustic compressions and rarefactions in the atmospheric pressure creating what is commonly referred to sound waves. These sound waves travel a few feet across the studio where they vibrate the diaphragm of a microphone. The microphone converts the diaphragm’s acoustic vibrations into analog electrical energy, meaning that the signal has a continuous voltage. The analog signal is then converted into a digital one consisting of 1’s and 0’s before being converted back into an analogue signal which is amplified by several orders of magnitude before being converted into a EM wave that is broadcast throughout the world. (TODO, satellites and actually research the signal flow dummy) The waves are decoded be a terrestrial radio, often hundreds of miles away, back into a relatively accurate approximation of the electronic data that left the broadcasting studio a fraction a second in the past. The signal is amplified and converted into sound waves by the radio’s speaker(s), which travel through the room until it comes into contact with someone’s eardrum. The eardrum is a thin membrane that vibrates in reaction to changes in the atmospheric pressure. Its vibrations are amplified mechanically by bones in our inner ear that, in turn, are attached to other membranes which are set into motion. These membranes cause liquid in the cochlea to move back and forth causing tiny hairs to become agitated. The agitated hairs send electrical signals to the auditory lobe of our brain which decodes the information into what we perceive as sound (“Understanding How the Ear Works”). EB complicates this already complex order of transmission, transduction and perception by adding another abstraction (magnetic inductance), into the signal chain.       In EB, the radios tune into and decode radio waves pulsating through the gallery into analog electric signals. The signals are amplified before being sent through the unbalanced instrument cables hanging in the gallery. The cables each have 16ohm resistors at their ends which bridge the positive and negative leads: this provides what I call a “specter load”. Spector load implies the resistors are placeholders for something more tangible: the absent speakers. The specter resistor allows the system to get electronic work done and is essential to creating a strong enough magnetic field to be sensed with the electromagnetic transducer residing in the EavesDroppers. Once the pickups inside of the EavesDroppers detect the field, they produce an electronic current which is amplified before being sent to a pair of headphones worn by a gallery interactee. The EavesDroppers, in practice, function as a second receiver: they pull energy out of the air and decode the music hidden inside just like the radios do. The EavesDroppers, however, have a much shorter range and are limited to detecting changes in its magnetic field: they operate entirely off of magnetism. Still to this day, most people tend to think of magnetism and electricity as separate entities. (TODO find evidence of this) I will even go out onto a limb to say that more people are comfortable with the nature of light being both a wave and a particle than with the inherent linkage between electricity and magnetism.3.5.5 Relationship with ElectricityEB addresses our relationship with electronics and electricity, a commonality throughout my work as an installation artist. Our societal and personal relationships with electricity are complex, strange, ever changing and a constant source of inspiration for me. In 2016 we are very removed from electricity and circuitry in its raw ‘natural’ form. In our daily lives, we generally press a button or interact with another form of abstraction that then operates on the circuitry that is always hidden from view. It is rare that we find ourselves in a situation where we are directly interacting with circuitry or electricity. This generally, has been the case since the introduction of electrical systems. This is with good reason; electrical energy has the capacity to harm us physically.  Since the War of the Currents starting in the late 1890’s between Tesla and Edison, where public electrocutions of animals and pets were performed in the streets, electricity has been associated with danger and death to a large portion of the population(“The War of the Currents”).       We are, obviously, concerned with the result of electronic work instead of the electricity itself in nearly all cases. For example, the computer I am typing my thesis on right now, which uses electrical energy to conduct its computations, is more useful than the electrical arcs bursting out of a Tesla Coil: even though the Coil consumes orders of magnitude more electricity than my laptop.  To give another example, the lightbulb that is hanging above me right now is functional as a result of the light produced by the electrical work done on the filament: the electricity itself is not directly providing us with light, instead, the light is a byproduct of heat produced by current flowing inside the bulb.      As an installation artist, I am both interested in complicating as well as simplifying our most common electronic interaction modalities. The majority of my installations and research prior to EB explored simplifying our relationship with electricity by removing abstractions and presenting more direct interaction with circuitry. Electrical Box, instead, complicates our relationship with the radio by inserting additional steps into the signal chain, forcing us to navigate additional abstraction layers.3.6 Reception and Future Work3.7 ConclusionTODO:ENTER IN DESIGN OF POSSIBLE SIGNALS      Galleries are intentional spaces: people expect their interaction with gallery contents to be curated. Everything is examined under a fine microscope and every minute detail is interpreted, discussed, and critiqued. Mistakes are reinterpreted as intent while artificial meanings manifest. Chapter 4 Challenge Human-Circuit Interaction Modalities4.1 IntroductionDirect interaction with electricity is generally not a good way to go about getting work done. In fact, when discussing electrical systems, we often speak in terms of electronic work that is performed. This is because electricity in its raw form is of little use, the power of electronics comes from the design and construction of many different types of electronic components that are combined in specific ways to accomplish tasks. As a result, we usually interact with electricity via a physical abstraction. For instance, when you press buttons on your microwave to make popcorn, you press a button that bridges two points in a circuit creating a connection that did not exist before. You operate through the button which then operates on the circuit, changes the circuits state and electrical work is done.       This chapter discusses different approaches for creating interfaces that challenge interaction conventions between humans and electronic systems. Some of the approaches discussed, such as the Discovery Synth, require that the interactee becomes part of the circuity by removing any abstractions for us to operate on. Approaches that bypass the interfaces of prexististing electrical systems and insert a puppeteer that controls multiple ‘puppet’ devices is presented with the Voltage Slammer and Toys projects. Techniques that involves the interception and manipulation of control data is discussed with the Synergetic SNES and 4-to-1 projects. The Retrono interfaces are discussed as examples utilizing subtractive manipulation techniques to expose systems to the direct interactions seen with the Discovery Synth project. Interfaces that      ProjectType of ProjectConvention AddressedApproachDiscovery SynthSynthesizer/InstallationButton/Pot AbstractionsSimplificationVoltage SlammerSequencer/Installation/Circuit Bending ToolObject interactionSubversive Injection, bypassing interfaceModular SNESCircuit Bent Video Game Console / InstallationExpectationsSubversive Injection and redirectionSynergetic SNESInstallationCo-operative gamingComplicationRetronoVideo Synthesizer/InstallationObject interactionBypassing interface, simplification      4.2 Discovery SynthFigure 22: Discovery SynthThe Discovery Synthesizer could be described as a “low-tech” electronic music interface. I decided to build the at as fundamental of a level as possible. I build my own buttons and pots that relied on the human bodies (minimal) electric conductivity.4.2.1 Technical DetailsI worked with Clay Chaplin to design a Raspberry Pi Cape that allowed for the use of sensors, LEDs, and all of the tools needed for creating a Raspberry Pi powered synthesizer. The Discovery Synth is the name of a Raspberry Pi Cape I designed for Clay Chaplin and the Networked Computer Music Ensemble at CalArts. The Cape was used by the class to build Raspberry Pi powered synthesizers. Two MCP3008 8-channel 10-bit A/D converters are used to read 16 voltage dividers. 12 buttons, two LEDs and pinouts for a LCD monitor are included on the cape as well. 	The ensemble used Pure Data to read in the input states of the buttons and pots/sliders and provided the synthesis engine as well. Everyone in the ensemble was able to choose what specific components they used for the buttons and voltage dividers.  Although I used conventional potentiometers for 8 of my voltage dividers I took unconventional approaches to the other 8 voltage dividers and 8 buttons. 4.2.2 Approach to Interaction4.2.2.1 Abstracting the ButtonsFigure 23: Approach to removing physical abstractions for Discovery Synth’s buttons and potsI removed the physical abstraction that separates the action of pressing and the flow of electrical current in a circuit. This is accomplished by removing the mechanical portion of the pushbutton design and by presenting the two ‘ends’ of the circuit on the interface for the interactee to bridge with their fingertips; completing the circuit. As skin is one of the most resistive type of tissue and its specific resistance varies greatly depending on the amount of pushing pressure and the amount of moisture or other contaminants found on the finger, a slight modification of the standard button circuitry had to be used. A large 10M (TODO), resistor is placed after the signal tap (see diagram that is eagle diagram of button circuit). This circuitry allowed the finger to bridge the gap between the two conductive pins, conduct enough current to complete the circuit and be consistently read by the Pi, successfully removing the need for a physical abstraction.4.2.2.2 Abstracting the potiometerFigure 24: Resistive Materials research for the Discovery Synth slidersAs with the buttons, the goal for the construction of the ‘sliders’ was to remove the physical abstraction that stands in the way between the human and the electrons and to create a more direct interaction. The sliders removed the wiper from typical potentiometer or slider design and instead relied on the user physically connecting the leads to a resistive strip (see figure 24).It used 32 gauge kanthal wire (a sort of restive wire that feels similar to iron, has a resistance of about 30 ohms a foot, is quite brittle, and the form that I used is most commonly seen in electronic cigarettes; as a heating source for vaporizing various flavors of goo. As I wanted to use a material that was as resistive as possible I chose to use the smallest wire I could use before running the risk of injuring the user. The 32 AWG gauge wire that was used measured in as a mere 8 thousandths of an inch thick.      The wire was strung across two bridges; one wooden and one metal. The wire hovers over a strip of copper tape that has an extremely low resistance; less than 1 Ohm a foot. One end of the tungsten wire is attached to system ground while the other end is connected to the power rail on the Raspberry Pi. When the tungsten wire is pressed against the copper tape a voltage divider is created. Unfortunately, as the wires have such low resistance, the voltage dividers draw a fairly large amount of current; 110mA each. Unlike a Microcontroller such as the Arduino the Raspberry Pi 2 has very low maximum output current ratings over the GPIO pins. The Pi 2 was designed with the spec of 3mA current draw from each of the pins, with a maximum draw of 16mA from a single pin or 51mA from the entire device. that this project was built for has a maximum current draw of is limited to max current draw of XXXXX the combined current draw of all eight of my deconstructed sliders was more than the Pi could handle at 880mA. The solution was to add a resistor in series with the tungsten wire with a value of 1k. Unfortunately, this greatly reduced the fidelity of the signal received from the sensor, but with some software smoothing it was usable given the fact that the controller also included eight vanilla pots that could be mapped to anything requiring more precision.      This circuitry allowed for the performer to directly complete the circuitry for the voltage divider without acting through a physical abstraction. There is no barrier between the human finger and the electrons flowing through the synthesizer. This gives this instrument a quality that is somewhat unique within the real of computer interfaces; it will electronically react differently to different people depending on that persons unique electrical properties. Figure 25: Discovery Synth as one controller for the Yin~Yang interactive installation in 2015.4.3 Retrono SynthesizersFigure 26: Second version of the Retrono SynthesizersThe Retrons are literally turned inside out19 and repackaged in custom enclosures. With their circuitry unveiled, and with no software to guide their computational logic, the Retrons becomes very susceptible to electro-magnetic interference. The Retrons are effectively transformed into 8-bit a/v synthesizers that generate their output based on the electrical noise present in the circuit.      Cathode Ray Tubes explores unconventional approaches for human-circuit interaction by eliminating all sensors, buttons, knobs and all other “middle-men” between the circuit and the user. It empowers us to utilize the natural electrical properties of our bodies to directly control the normally hidden circuitry that we are surrounded by but removed from in our daily lives.      Cathode Ray Tubes attempts to bring to light our effect of electronics. It shows that our physical bodies have electrical properties unto themselves and that our mere presence void of intent, sends ripples through nearby electrical systems. It seeks to flip the dialogue of how we are effected by the constant presence of electrical devices and asks “How does the constant presence of human bodies effect the electrical systems?”.      Sometimes art falls on your lap and it is your job tell people about it. That was the case with Cathode Ray Tubes. I was looking for inexpensive alternatives to the NES20 to experiment with circuit bending. I was in the middle of developing my Modular SNES and was looking to expand my efforts to consoles besides the SEGA Genesis and the SNES21. I ordered a Retron video game console that was basically a cheap Chinese knock-off of the original NES. The simple device ran off of two chips a XXxxxxxx and a xxxxxxxxx. At first when I opened the case and examined the circuitry I was disappointed at how sparse the PCB was. Generally, when circuit bending devices you want lots of through-hole components and large IC’s with lots of pins. Most everything on the board was surface mount and I was unable to get too many interesting bends on my first pass. I, for some reason, decided to experiment and removed the gaming cartridge from the device and booted it up. I was amazed that it displayed a beautiful 8bit quazi-random image. The entire console, additionally, became hyper sensitive to EM interference. If you touched the board it would begin to oscillate and create some very interesting patterns.       Four CRT TV’s are arranged in a semicircle each on its own small table. In front of each TV is a video synthesizer with its circuitry exposed. The TV’s and the synths are each connected in a feedback loop with each synth reacting to electric field emanating from the TV it is placed in front of. Gallery goers are invited into the space to discover that their bodies natural electrical properties are all they need to begin seizing control over the installations a/v feedback loop.      Cathode Ray Tubes is an interactive, audio-visual installation that sonifies and visualizes the human bodies electrical properties by demonstrating the effect our bodies have on electronic circuitry. Four modified Retrons are placed in close proximity to CRT TV’s within the installation space. This allows the static electricity produced by the TV’s to interact with the Retrons circuitry, modulating their audio and video outputs. The Retrons are connected in such a way that the video output of each Retron reverberates through all other units in one large feedback loop.  Audio is generated for the space by the Retrons in the same manner as the video. This combined configuration creates a resting state for the installation that is in constant flux as all the Retrons and TV’s are feeding off of each other’s electrical fields.      As the entire system is presented in a manner that emphasizes instability and assailability, the human body becomes an effective controller: due to its inherent electrical properties. Acts such as waving a hand in front of a TV or Retron, touching a TV or a Retron, moving a Retron’s angle or distance from a TV and combinations of the above (touching a Retron and placing your hand a few inches away from a TV) will produce different effects that resonate throughout the feedback loop. If multiple people are in the gallery space, the installation scales nicely as the number and complexity of the effects produce even more drastic results in the Retron feedback loop.      Cathode Ray Tubes is designed to create a space of discovery that invites viewers to forge their own personal experience with the environment and its circuitry, and the goal of the installation is not that each gallery goer manipulates the feedback loop in every possible way, but rather that most gallery participants explore a relationship with the circuitry that feels unique to them. As with Electrical Box this installation did little to directly tell participants how to interact with the space.4.3.1 Technical DetailsCathode Ray Tubes was an act of removal in terms of the circuitry. I replaced the standard red ‘power’ led with a white LED and de-soldered the controller ports from the board. Besides that, I did nothing else to modify the circuity. 4.3.2 Approach to InteractionCathode Ray Tubes did not have any specific ‘rail’ of interaction that I wanted to guide people though. I was happy if someone entered the room and observed the ‘static’ systems in the inactive state and felt that the presentation of the technology itself was worthy of the gallery. However, people who read the signage were alerted to the fact that the installation was interactive.4.4 Modular SNESThe modular SNES is the natural continuation of my work with the circuit bent SNES’s that are used in the installation 199022 I developed in early 2015. My first success with console bending was with an old SNES I had. After carefully opening the case and looking at the circuitry inside I started researching the role each IC played in the workings of the device. After a little poking around I was able to pinpoint the video memory chips which contained the information used for rendering the video and could start experimenting.  Luckily, unlike other consoles I have worked with, with the SNES all the ROM23 and video chips are easily accessible and bends were plentiful.      Wanting to keep the project simple I decided to simply check each via to ground for any sort of effect. I turned the console on and started making connections. About 30% of the vias were receptacle to some sort of modulation. I carefully marked these active connections on a printout of the circuit board I made. After testing everything I reviewed my sheet and narrowed down my choices, I actually had too many bends to implement. I soldered leads from a ribbon cable to the vias until two ribbons were filled. I cut a little piece of plastic from the back of the case to fit the ribbon cables through and soldered one last wire to the GND rail on the SNES. I closed up the console, put the screws back in place and started gaming.4.4.1 Technical DetailsFigure 27: Modular SNES, first of three designs.Internally, most all of the electrical signals that dictate the operations of the SNES console operates on a 5v logic level(“Snes_schematic_color.pdf”).The Modular SNES, however, does not only provide a path to ground for these bends but instead opens them up to the world by porting the connections to the outside via 1/8th inch ports. The Modular SNES also has an Arduino Nano hidden inside with four input jacks, four analogue pots as well as its own 8 outputs. All of the inputs and outputs also have their own 1/8th inch jacks. The Modular synth allows for all of its 14 or 17 bends (depending on model) to either control the output of the Arduino or be bent by the Arduino or each other.4.4.2 Approach to Interaction4.5 Symbiotic SNESFigure 28: First Revision of the Ultimate Co-Op Arduino ShieldThe Symbiotic SNES system is an attempt to create new experiences from familiar technology. Two SNES controllers are attached to an Arduino Mega that mimics a SNES console and decodes the controller information, such as button presses, performs computation on the data, and sends the data in a modified state to an actual SNES. What the system does depends on he current operating mode.       There have been over a dozen modes created to this date spread between two main types: single player and multiplayer modes. The single player modes are all different ways that two participants are able to play a single player game together assisted the Symbiotic SNES. For example, the “Agree” mode only sends messages (button presses) to the SNES if both of the input controllers are pressing the same button at the same time.  The “Both Control” mode grants both input controllers full agency over the SNES by summing the input from the two controllers into one stream of information sent to the SNES. “Teamwork” functions by only accepting one button press from each player at a time: if you want to run and jump one input controller must be pressing the run button while the other must press the  jump button. There are also a few alternating modes that only give one player control at a time, but shifts the control back and forth between the two input controller according to the number of buttons pressed or a time period.      The second category of modes are the multiplayer modes which were designed to be used when playing a multiplayer competitive game. 4.5.1 Technical DetailsTwo SNES knock off controllers have their plugs cut off and wires stripped. The SNES controller uses five wires to communicate with the SNES console. The SNES powers the circuitry on the controller with the first two wires which are 5V and GND. The other three pins are for communication: Clock, Latch and Data. Thanks to the XXXXX Arduino library it is just a simple matter of  (INSERT CODE) to read in incoming controller data. Once the Arduino knows which buttons are being pressed on the two input controllers it performs its logic before flipping digital pins that are connected to pads with wires soldered into them whose other ends are soldered to each of the button pads of a SNES controller. When the sensing side of the button  pad reads 5v it sends an ‘ON’ messages to the SNES, instead of the controller receiving this voltage via the bridging of the two sides of the button, the Arduino mimics this be sending its own voltage to the pad.       As oppose to my other work with SNES consoles this project is completely portable. The Symbiotic SNES system will work on any production SNES ever made and is not tied to any hardware modifications to the console itself. As the SNES’s internal voltage level is most always 5v, the console lends itself nicely to interfacing with Arduino microcontrollers, in this project the Arduino is directly powered through its output connections to the SNES console.        The SNES controllers buttons are purely binary, meaning they are either on or off with no alternative: this lends itself nicely to bitwise logic operations. In fact, that is how all of the first mods started out.  If the controller inputs from the two controllers have a bitwise AND performed on them the resulting interaction will be that no messages get sent through unless both controllers are pressing the same button at the same time: which is the “Agree” mode. Likewise, if a XOR is performed on the incoming controller data only buttons that are pressed on a single controller are sent through, but if both controller press the button they cancel each other out and no message is sent to the host.4.5.2 Approach to Interaction4.6 The Voltage SlammerFigure 29: The Voltage SlammerThe Voltage Slammer is not only a mechanism for controlling circuit bent electronics but it also a platform for assisting in the act of circuit bending itself. The Voltage Slammer is an ongoing exploration in controlling circuit bent toys and instruments with Arduino powered interfaces. The Voltage Slammer interface was shown within the context of the interactive installation Toys at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo where the interface controlled four Farmer Says, a robotic talking bear, and two keyboards. 4.6.1 Technical DetailsAll of the devices were bent using the interface. The interface utilized RCA connectors between the circuit bent devices and the interface. This was because of the inexpensive nature of these connectors and the fact that they had two points of connection, as oppose to say, a Banana Jack. RCA jacks have the added benefit of taking up little space on the inside of the unit. This is very important when circuit bending small electronic devices that often have very little extra space in their cases.      After the Toys installation was shown at the 2014 Digital Arts Expo I decided to redesign the interface to feature 16 rotary knobs with built in push buttons and RGB24 LEDs. I replaced the SPST25 toggle switches with large sleeker metal pushbuttons, also with LED’s inside. The current interface is powered by an Arduino Mega and can be either batter powered or powered via USB. It functions both as a controller for specially hacked toys or electronic devices or as a useful tool for hardware hacking and circuit probing/bending. It is designed specifically for working with low voltage DC circuits and can’t handle anything high voltage or high current. Its first eight output channels are PWM26 waves each with a pot controlling intensity (PW) and a switch to cut off the current flow entirely. The first eight outputs are also effected by a master delay pot stationed in the upper left hand corner of the interface. The master delay will in effect rapidly trigger the outputs, this is effective for simulating switch or toggle conditions in bent circuits and is necessary for getting many instruments to reach incantation.      The next five outputs are in effect the same as the first eight with the noticeable exception that they have no feedback LEDS, no on/off switches and are arranged on the interface in a separate group. They are intended to be used to control motors in bent devices, or any other bend in which you desire a constant current and don’t want the output to be effected by the master delay pot. When Toys was presented at the Digital Arts Expo these outputs controlled the talking robotic bear. In the rear of the device all 13 outputs are accessible via RCA connectors, with the ring connected to a common ground and the internal pin the hot signal. In addition, there is one additional RCA connection in which both the ring and pin are connected to ground, to allow for easier probing and bending.4.6.2 Approach to InteractionThe front of the interface has a built in ultra-sonic sensor allowing for the entire unit to be shut off when no one is within a reasonable distance. When the installation is idol, it will remain off for just under a minute before pulsing all its channels, basically calling out for interactees, it will continue repeating this cycle until someone approaches in which it will turn itself on. Thanks to its ultrasonic rangefinder the Voltage Slammer was aware of the presence of humans. When no-one was near the device the device entered into a resting state. It stopped sending continuous signals to its circuit bent minions and was mostly silent, allowing the toys to complete the cycles they might have been currently engaged in. The Voltage Slammer will then proceed to randomly pulse one of the devices every two minutes. This is an act to silicate attention from anyone in the gallery. Once the presence of a body is detected by the voltage slammer the device will enter into its active state; again sending messages out to its toys.	The result of the Voltage Slammers interaction with its circuit bent toys was in a state of constant flux: it was hard to predict what the actual results might be from one sitting to another. The system would behave differently if there was 5 devices connected or 10 devices as each new device that was added changed the electronic properties of the system. Chapter 5 Mechatronic Systems and Cybernetics5.1 The Machine Lab at CalArtsFigure 30: Machine Lab @ CalArts: home to the MTIID department and the Digital Arts Minor (TOD): more resent pictureThe CalArts machine lab is the hub of the MTIID department as well as the digital arts minor at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia California. Besides being the technological hub for the institute the Machine lab is home to the Machine Orchestra and the 10 mechatronic instruments the Orchestra consists of.       Over the summer of 2016 I was hired by the MTIID faculty at the California Institute of the Arts to repair and reassemble/integrate nearly a half dozen or so mechatronic personalities that resided in the Machine Lab. I had no idea what condition the instruments were in and what my time would be spent doing. I had hopes of getting everything working perfectly and maintaining the integrity of the department. 	I spent the first few weeks cleaning the machines, polishing, and tightening. I took careful note as to how they were assembled and what their capabilities were. Eventually I was tasked to prioritize my efforts to working on two specific robots. Lydia and JackBox. Timpin had his hand in the creation of both of these machines. JackBox was actually created for the Kronoz Quartet, was unable to find a home and ended up staying on loan to the MTIID department. JackBox had been sitting in the front of the Machine Lab for as long as I have been at CalArts and I was under the impression that it no longer worked. Lydia, was once glorious, but the 2016 spring semester and Digital Arts Expo had taken its toll on the once proud centerpiece of the Machine Lab. 5.1.1 Repairing and Maintaining the existing bots5.1.1.1 Repairing JackBoxNot 100% sure if this should/needs to be a section. When you are tasked with repairing a work of art it is quite different than repairing your friends busted 01’ Honda Civic. You have to maintain the integrity of the.5.2 Divine Council The Divine Council mechatronic art system is a adaptation of the MTIID servers that control all of the mechatronic instruments residing in the CalArts Machine Lab. 5.2.1 System Overview5.2.2 Control server5.2.3 Sensor server5.2.4 Bots and BoardsIt is very important that you use the same sets of connectors for everything.Try to always use metric/imperial stuff like that5.2.4.1 Brigid and Homados5.2.4.2 Hermes5.2.4.3 Theia5.3 Mechatronic InstallationsHaving studied with Ajay Kapur and attended demonstrations of the Electroacoustic Resonation Piano by Andrew McPherson I know how high the bar is for mechatronic instruments. From the beginning of each of my ventures into building mechatronic art I try to seek out a need and design as a solution for that need. One of the most successful instruments in the Machine Lab at the California Institute of the Arts are the ‘Clappers’. The ‘Clappers’ actually consists of twenty independent tiny mechatronic instruments that were specifically designed by a team of student artists and professors for a multimedia performance called Samsara. {Citation}5.3.1 Digital RainFigure 31: Digital Rain as presented at the 2015 Digital Arts ExpoDigital Rain is a data driven art installation, examining the crossroads of algorithmic and generative music, emergence patterns, data sonification, and technology driven systems of expression. 192 electromagnetic relay switches are arranged into a grid and mounted onto a wall. The relays are connected and controlled by 6 Arduino Megas which are networked together and controlled by a hidden host computer.      A Python script gathers real-time details about weather conditions from a randomly selected meteorological station on the globe. A text-to-speech program announces the location and selected aspects of the weather report through a speaker that sits in front of the installation. Meta conditions (sunny, rain, etc.) select the base composition algorithm while the performance specifics are a factor of the forecasts wind speed, humidity, temperature and pressure. Digital Rain utilizes the mechanical ticking of the relays switching as the sonic source material for the piece. The relays, because of their precision and speed, are able to actuate fast enough to produce sustained pitch. This in addition to their idiosyncratic rhythmic snaps allows for us to create a wide variety of soundscapes. When the generative composition comes to a close, the system resets and a new station is polled.5.3.2 Computer Music EnsembleFigure 32: Computer Music at the 2016 Digital Arts ExpoI have a similar approach to music composition as I have to installation signage. In general, I don’t like to tell people what to do. When I used to play in bands and would have an idea for a song. I would not write a part for everyone in the band, but would instead write my part, and think about how I would like the song to come across. We were all musicians were in the band to create music together so we would let everyone one else in the band write their own parts. We would collectively brainstorm different possibilities a give each other constructive feedback until we got everything sounding good. We trusted each other to know our own instrument that each other and respected each other’s taste. The music was great.       When writing music for an ensemble taking on the role of the composer the roles are different. Especially in the realm of networked computer music. I gave everyone the same system but vague time based commands like turn this knob to max over 30 seconds. Additionally, the score was determined in real time by a computer program. Each time though the piece the score would be different for each performer. The ensemble was a group of x students and our instructor Clay Chaplin.5.3.2.1 Technical Details5.3.2.2 Approach to Interaction      One thing that sets Computer Music apart from other approaches to mechatronic instruments is the fact that the original housings for the motors are maintained. Additionally, usually with mechatronic instruments the motors and actuators are used to trigger some sort of musical instrument be it a membrane or a string. Computer music literally amplifies the sounds of the motors themselves as the primary sonic material instead of the physical work done by the motor.       Luckily for me, there has been extensive work done in the field of making music from Floppies, HDD’s and CD-ROM drives and I really just had to find the information and implement it.       So far as this project is concerned floppy drives have given me the most bang for my buck. The excellent Arduino library Moppy written and developed by the programmer SammyIAm provides an easy to use interface for playing MIDI notes on floppy drives. I was able to create a new internal MIDI bus on my Mac and pipe MIDI messages from Ableton Live to Moppy which in turn controlled the Floppy Drives.      Floppy drives take a four pin power connector that consists of one 12V, one 5V and two GND wires. This is the same pin configuration that is used by the old-school Molex connectors that all HDD’s and CD-ROM drives utilized in the early 2000’s. I grabbed an old computer power supply I had lying about and a perfboard and created three long rails for my two power connections and my ground to which I connected six floppy drives. I built custom connectors and jumpers to fool the floppies into thinking they are connected to a computer and the fun began. Here are six of the floppy drives being sequenced in Ableton in my first ever floppy drive improve jam. So far HDD’s have given me the most trouble in actually controlling. At this point I have determined, just like with the floppy drives, lots of mileage can be squeezed out of precise pickup placement on the drives. Here is the current state of my HDD control, pretty lame (this video uses pickups instead of piezo disks for amplification)5.3.3 No Humans AllowedNo Humans Allowed creates a community of mechatronic personalities that reside in the “gated” WaveCave community. The personalities are xenophobic: reacting to outsiders via paralysis or violence. When the presence of a human is detected, the community breaks down and no longer functions harmoniously. The result is a hostile space that outsiders are not able to enter without being either attacked or shunned by the society residing within. Each of the six mechatronic sound sculptures (personalities) are constructed from extruded aluminum, acrylic, ultrasonic rangefinders, solenoids, DC motors and LED’s. The personalities are either hanging from the grid or resting on the floor depending on their size and construction. The ultrasonic rangefinders allow each personality to detect the presence of gallery viewers who will affect their behavior. When no outside presence is detected, all members of the community are alive, active, and productive. The presence of a human or ‘other’ disrupts the community. If the outsider gets too close to any specific sculpture, the personality will either become paralyzed by hate and fear (turn off) or will attempt to “violently” deter the intruder (loud, abrupt, a-rhythmic noises). Either way, the personality will be so preoccupied by the presence of the ‘other’ it will no longer contribute to the community as a whole, disrupting the harmony of society. No Humans Allowed hopes to shine light on the danger of xenophobic ‘other’ thinking that is becoming more and more common in the UK with Brexit and the United States with the election of Trump. With the rise of mechatronics, robots, AI the question of AI morality is becoming atopic of discussion in more and more circles. Do we want our robotic children to exhibit violent, isolationist, bigoted tendencies or do we want them to be accepting, loving and caring to all other forms of live and intelligence?5.3.3.1 Technical descriptionThree of the robotic personalities are standing sculpture constructed out of 80/20 extruded aluminum beams, three different banks of 6 solenoids and four stepper motors. The other three personalities are  motor mobiles : the top is two pieces of clear acrylic cut in a circle., there is  an Arduino onboard that controls 6 5V 3200rpm DC motors that each have a white LED soldered between its two leads. The gallery consists of three pair of personalities with each pair containing one mobile and one standing sculpture. When no ‘other’ is detected in the proximity of the sculptures the standing and hanging personalities chirp in unison, each solenoid triggering  is mirrored by a motor twitching in the hanging personality.  However, as soon as someone is detected the link between the two is broken as the more aggressive standing sculpture attempts to deter the invader while the hanging personality Is too paralyzed by fear and hatred to  do anything .5.3.3.2 Approach to Interaction
Chapter 6 Conclusion6.1 SummaryRestating the problem and summary of thesis scope.6.2 Primary ContributionsRestate the primary contributions discussed in the thesis.6.3 Other DiscussionsAny additional discussion sections…6.3.1 Other discussion sub-point6.4 Final ThoughtsYour big ideas and final conclusions.Creating art that demands unconventional interaction modalities must reinvent the gallery space.6.5 Future Work: 
Bibliography“CABINET // Invisible Cities: An Interview with Christina Kubisch.” N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Sept. 2016.Ghazala, Reed. Circuit-Bending: Build Your Own Alien Instruments. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2005. Print.Hinkle-Turner, Elizabeth. Women Composers and Music Technology in the United States: Crossing the Line. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2006. Print.Net, Media Art. “Media Art Net | Kubisch, Christina: Sound Flow Light Source – Forty Pillars and One Room.” text. N.p., 5 Oct. 2016. Web. 5 Oct. 2016.“PAM8403.pdf.” Web. 31 Oct. 2016.“Snes_schematic_color.pdf.” : n. pag. Print.“The War of the Currents: AC vs. DC Power.” Energy.gov. N.p., n.d. Web. 14 Nov. 2016.“Understanding How the Ear Works.” Hearing Link. N.p., n.d. Web. 12 Nov. 2016.Vogt, Nancy. “Audio: Fact Sheet.” Pew Research Center’s Journalism Project. N.p., 15 June 2016. Web. 21 Oct. 2016.1 Light Emitting Diodes2 California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California, USA3 Electrical Box4 Cathode Ray Tubes - 2016, Computer Music – 2016, Discovery Synth - 20155 Electromagnetic6 Do It Yourself – The method of building, modifying or repairing things without the direct aid of experts or professionals7 Printed Circuit Boards8 Budget interconnection company that is cost effective alternative to Molex. Most commonly seen with battery jacks and plugs in hobbyist projects.9 A black box is a device or system that is viewed in terms of its transfer characteristics (inputs and outputs) without any knowledge of its internal workings.10 The AR1010 FM breakout board is 1.1x1.1cm while the Si4703 was too expensive for the project at 19.95 on sparkfun.com11 Mfine 938B 12 Universal Serial Bus13 Sabrent 60Watt Desktop USB Rapid Charger14 Museum of Modern Art, New York City, New York, USA15 Los Angeles County of Art, Los Angeles, California, USA16 In video game design a game is considered to be “on-rail” if the manner the player travels is pre-determined on a line, as if literally on rails. This originally was done to allow for the use of high production backgrounds and higher quality pre-rendered graphics. Over time this technical approach to game design has become a stylistic one that still persists today. Examples of games that are on-rail include the Star Fox, Time Crisis, and The House of the Dead series.17 The gallery is 20 feet wide, 20 feet long and 10 feet high18 The sport or practice of exploring or studying caves: especially when performed as a hobby.19 The circuit boards are exposed while the buttons, controller jacks and cartridge ports are removed.20 Nintendo Entertainment System was a popular 8-bit video game console that was in production from July 15th, 1983 (1985 in the States) until 2003 (1995 in the States).21 Super Nintendo Entertainment System was the 16-bit predecessor to the NES (also known as the Super Famicom outside of the Americas). The SNES was in production from 1991 (1990 in Japan) to 1999 (2003 in Japan).22 The SNES that were used for the installation were re-designed and manufactured in 1990. I found these models the easiest to work with.23 Read Only Memory24 Red, Green and Blue25 Single pole single throw : a switch that has two states and one channel26 Pulse Wave Modification : A high frequency digital signal that has a variable duty cycle allowing for a pseudo variable voltage.--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------i